[Illustration:

                             GEORGE ALLEN
                               PUBLISHER

                        156 CHARING CROSS ROAD
                                LONDON

                             RUSKIN HOUSE
                                   ]

                            [Illustration:

               _Reading Jane’s Letters._      _Chap 34._
                                   ]

                                PRIDE.
                                  and
                               PREJUDICE

                                  by
                             Jane Austen,

                           with a Preface by
                           George Saintsbury
                                  and
                           Illustrations by
                             Hugh Thomson

                         [Illustration: 1894]

                       Ruskin       156. Charing
                       House.        Cross Road.

                                London
                             George Allen.

             CHISWICK PRESS:--CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.
                  TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.

                            [Illustration:

                          _To J. Comyns Carr
                      in acknowledgment of all I
                       owe to his friendship and
                    advice, these illustrations are
                         gratefully inscribed_

                            _Hugh Thomson_
                                   ]

PREFACE.

[Illustration]

_Walt Whitman has somewhere a fine and just distinction between “loving
by allowance” and “loving with personal love.” This distinction applies
to books as well as to men and women; and in the case of the not very
numerous authors who are the objects of the personal affection, it
brings a curious consequence with it. There is much more difference as
to their best work than in the case of those others who are loved “by
allowance” by convention, and because it is felt to be the right and
proper thing to love them. And in the sect--fairly large and yet
unusually choice--of Austenians or Janites, there would probably be
found partisans of the claim to primacy of almost every one of the
novels. To some the delightful freshness and humour of_ Northanger
Abbey, _its completeness, finish, and_ entrain, _obscure the undoubted
critical facts that its scale is small, and its scheme, after all, that
of burlesque or parody, a kind in which the first rank is reached with
difficulty._ Persuasion, _relatively faint in tone, and not enthralling
in interest, has devotees who exalt above all the others its exquisite
delicacy and keeping. The catastrophe of_ Mansfield Park _is admittedly
theatrical, the hero and heroine are insipid, and the author has almost
wickedly destroyed all romantic interest by expressly admitting that
Edmund only took Fanny because Mary shocked him, and that Fanny might
very likely have taken Crawford if he had been a little more assiduous;
yet the matchless rehearsal-scenes and the characters of Mrs. Norris and
others have secured, I believe, a considerable party for it._ Sense and
Sensibility _has perhaps the fewest out-and-out admirers; but it does
not want them._

_I suppose, however, that the majority of at least competent votes
would, all things considered, be divided between_ Emma _and the present
book; and perhaps the vulgar verdict (if indeed a fondness for Miss
Austen be not of itself a patent of exemption from any possible charge
of vulgarity) would go for_ Emma. _It is the larger, the more varied, the
more popular; the author had by the time of its composition seen rather
more of the world, and had improved her general, though not her most
peculiar and characteristic dialogue; such figures as Miss Bates, as the
Eltons, cannot but unite the suffrages of everybody. On the other hand,
I, for my part, declare for_ Pride and Prejudice _unhesitatingly. It
seems to me the most perfect, the most characteristic, the most
eminently quintessential of its author’s works; and for this contention
in such narrow space as is permitted to me, I propose here to show
cause._

_In the first place, the book (it may be barely necessary to remind the
reader) was in its first shape written very early, somewhere about 1796,
when Miss Austen was barely twenty-one; though it was revised and
finished at Chawton some fifteen years later, and was not published till
1813, only four years before her death. I do not know whether, in this
combination of the fresh and vigorous projection of youth, and the
critical revision of middle life, there may be traced the distinct
superiority in point of construction, which, as it seems to me, it
possesses over all the others. The plot, though not elaborate, is almost
regular enough for Fielding; hardly a character, hardly an incident
could be retrenched without loss to the story. The elopement of Lydia
and Wickham is not, like that of Crawford and Mrs. Rushworth, a_ coup de
théâtre; _it connects itself in the strictest way with the course of the
story earlier, and brings about the denouement with complete propriety.
All the minor passages--the loves of Jane and Bingley, the advent of Mr.
Collins, the visit to Hunsford, the Derbyshire tour--fit in after the
same unostentatious, but masterly fashion. There is no attempt at the
hide-and-seek, in-and-out business, which in the transactions between
Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax contributes no doubt a good deal to the
intrigue of_ Emma, _but contributes it in a fashion which I do not think
the best feature of that otherwise admirable book. Although Miss Austen
always liked something of the misunderstanding kind, which afforded her
opportunities for the display of the peculiar and incomparable talent to
be noticed presently, she has been satisfied here with the perfectly
natural occasions provided by the false account of Darcy’s conduct given
by Wickham, and by the awkwardness (arising with equal naturalness) from
the gradual transformation of Elizabeth’s own feelings from positive
aversion to actual love. I do not know whether the all-grasping hand of
the playwright has ever been laid upon_ Pride and Prejudice; _and I dare
say that, if it were, the situations would prove not startling or
garish enough for the footlights, the character-scheme too subtle and
delicate for pit and gallery. But if the attempt were made, it would
certainly not be hampered by any of those loosenesses of construction,
which, sometimes disguised by the conveniences of which the novelist can
avail himself, appear at once on the stage._

_I think, however, though the thought will doubtless seem heretical to
more than one school of critics, that construction is not the highest
merit, the choicest gift, of the novelist. It sets off his other gifts
and graces most advantageously to the critical eye; and the want of it
will sometimes mar those graces--appreciably, though not quite
consciously--to eyes by no means ultra-critical. But a very badly-built
novel which excelled in pathetic or humorous character, or which
displayed consummate command of dialogue--perhaps the rarest of all
faculties--would be an infinitely better thing than a faultless plot
acted and told by puppets with pebbles in their mouths. And despite the
ability which Miss Austen has shown in working out the story, I for one
should put_ Pride and Prejudice _far lower if it did not contain what
seem to me the very masterpieces of Miss Austen’s humour and of her
faculty of character-creation--masterpieces who may indeed admit John
Thorpe, the Eltons, Mrs. Norris, and one or two others to their company,
but who, in one instance certainly, and perhaps in others, are still
superior to them._

_The characteristics of Miss Austen’s humour are so subtle and delicate
that they are, perhaps, at all times easier to apprehend than to
express, and at any particular time likely to be differently
apprehended by different persons. To me this humour seems to possess a
greater affinity, on the whole, to that of Addison than to any other of
the numerous species of this great British genus. The differences of
scheme, of time, of subject, of literary convention, are, of course,
obvious enough; the difference of sex does not, perhaps, count for much,
for there was a distinctly feminine element in “Mr. Spectator,” and in
Jane Austen’s genius there was, though nothing mannish, much that was
masculine. But the likeness of quality consists in a great number of
common subdivisions of quality--demureness, extreme minuteness of touch,
avoidance of loud tones and glaring effects. Also there is in both a
certain not inhuman or unamiable cruelty. It is the custom with those
who judge grossly to contrast the good nature of Addison with the
savagery of Swift, the mildness of Miss Austen with the boisterousness
of Fielding and Smollett, even with the ferocious practical jokes that
her immediate predecessor, Miss Burney, allowed without very much
protest. Yet, both in Mr. Addison and in Miss Austen there is, though a
restrained and well-mannered, an insatiable and ruthless delight in
roasting and cutting up a fool. A man in the early eighteenth century,
of course, could push this taste further than a lady in the early
nineteenth; and no doubt Miss Austen’s principles, as well as her heart,
would have shrunk from such things as the letter from the unfortunate
husband in the_ Spectator, _who describes, with all the gusto and all the
innocence in the world, how his wife and his friend induce him to play
at blind-man’s-buff. But another_ Spectator _letter--that of the damsel
of fourteen who wishes to marry Mr. Shapely, and assures her selected
Mentor that “he admires your_ Spectators _mightily”--might have been
written by a rather more ladylike and intelligent Lydia Bennet in the
days of Lydia’s great-grandmother; while, on the other hand, some (I
think unreasonably) have found “cynicism” in touches of Miss Austen’s
own, such as her satire of Mrs. Musgrove’s self-deceiving regrets over
her son. But this word “cynical” is one of the most misused in the
English language, especially when, by a glaring and gratuitous
falsification of its original sense, it is applied, not to rough and
snarling invective, but to gentle and oblique satire. If cynicism means
the perception of “the other side,” the sense of “the accepted hells
beneath,” the consciousness that motives are nearly always mixed, and
that to seem is not identical with to be--if this be cynicism, then
every man and woman who is not a fool, who does not care to live in a
fool’s paradise, who has knowledge of nature and the world and life, is
a cynic. And in that sense Miss Austen certainly was one. She may even
have been one in the further sense that, like her own Mr. Bennet, she
took an epicurean delight in dissecting, in displaying, in setting at
work her fools and her mean persons. I think she did take this delight,
and I do not think at all the worse of her for it as a woman, while she
was immensely the better for it as an artist._

_In respect of her art generally, Mr. Goldwin Smith has truly observed
that “metaphor has been exhausted in depicting the perfection of it,
combined with the narrowness of her field;” and he has justly added that
we need not go beyond her own comparison to the art of a miniature
painter. To make this latter observation quite exact we must not use the
term miniature in its restricted sense, and must think rather of Memling
at one end of the history of painting and Meissonier at the other, than
of Cosway or any of his kind. And I am not so certain that I should
myself use the word “narrow” in connection with her. If her world is a
microcosm, the cosmic quality of it is at least as eminent as the
littleness. She does not touch what she did not feel herself called to
paint; I am not so sure that she could not have painted what she did not
feel herself called to touch. It is at least remarkable that in two very
short periods of writing--one of about three years, and another of not
much more than five--she executed six capital works, and has not left a
single failure. It is possible that the romantic paste in her
composition was defective: we must always remember that hardly
anybody born in her decade--that of the eighteenth-century
seventies--independently exhibited the full romantic quality. Even Scott
required hill and mountain and ballad, even Coleridge metaphysics and
German to enable them to chip the classical shell. Miss Austen was an
English girl, brought up in a country retirement, at the time when
ladies went back into the house if there was a white frost which might
pierce their kid shoes, when a sudden cold was the subject of the
gravest fears, when their studies, their ways, their conduct were
subject to all those fantastic limits and restrictions against which
Mary Wollstonecraft protested with better general sense than particular
taste or judgment. Miss Austen, too, drew back when the white frost
touched her shoes; but I think she would have made a pretty good journey
even in a black one._

_For if her knowledge was not very extended, she knew two things which
only genius knows. The one was humanity, and the other was art. On the
first head she could not make a mistake; her men, though limited, are
true, and her women are, in the old sense, “absolute.” As to art, if she
has never tried idealism, her realism is real to a degree which makes
the false realism of our own day look merely dead-alive. Take almost any
Frenchman, except the late M. de Maupassant, and watch him laboriously
piling up strokes in the hope of giving a complete impression. You get
none; you are lucky if, discarding two-thirds of what he gives, you can
shape a real impression out of the rest. But with Miss Austen the
myriad, trivial, unforced strokes build up the picture like magic.
Nothing is false; nothing is superfluous. When (to take the present book
only) Mr. Collins changed his mind from Jane to Elizabeth “while Mrs.
Bennet was stirring the fire” (and we know_ how _Mrs. Bennet would have
stirred the fire), when Mr. Darcy “brought his coffee-cup back_
himself,” _the touch in each case is like that of Swift--“taller by the
breadth of my nail”--which impressed the half-reluctant Thackeray with
just and outspoken admiration. Indeed, fantastic as it may seem, I
should put Miss Austen as near to Swift in some ways, as I have put her
to Addison in others._

_This Swiftian quality appears in the present novel as it appears
nowhere else in the character of the immortal, the ineffable Mr.
Collins. Mr. Collins is really_ great; _far greater than anything Addison
ever did, almost great enough for Fielding or for Swift himself. It has
been said that no one ever was like him. But in the first place,_ he
_was like him; he is there--alive, imperishable, more real than hundreds
of prime ministers and archbishops, of “metals, semi-metals, and
distinguished philosophers.” In the second place, it is rash, I think,
to conclude that an actual Mr. Collins was impossible or non-existent at
the end of the eighteenth century. It is very interesting that we
possess, in this same gallery, what may be called a spoiled first
draught, or an unsuccessful study of him, in John Dashwood. The
formality, the under-breeding, the meanness, are there; but the portrait
is only half alive, and is felt to be even a little unnatural. Mr.
Collins is perfectly natural, and perfectly alive. In fact, for all the
“miniature,” there is something gigantic in the way in which a certain
side, and more than one, of humanity, and especially eighteenth-century
humanity, its Philistinism, its well-meaning but hide-bound morality,
its formal pettiness, its grovelling respect for rank, its materialism,
its selfishness, receives exhibition. I will not admit that one speech
or one action of this inestimable man is incapable of being reconciled
with reality, and I should not wonder if many of these words and actions
are historically true._

_But the greatness of Mr. Collins could not have been so satisfactorily
exhibited if his creatress had not adjusted so artfully to him the
figures of Mr. Bennet and of Lady Catherine de Bourgh. The latter, like
Mr. Collins himself, has been charged with exaggeration. There is,
perhaps, a very faint shade of colour for the charge; but it seems to me
very faint indeed. Even now I do not think that it would be impossible
to find persons, especially female persons, not necessarily of noble
birth, as overbearing, as self-centred, as neglectful of good manners,
as Lady Catherine. A hundred years ago, an earl’s daughter, the Lady
Powerful (if not exactly Bountiful) of an out-of-the-way country parish,
rich, long out of marital authority, and so forth, had opportunities of
developing these agreeable characteristics which seldom present
themselves now. As for Mr. Bennet, Miss Austen, and Mr. Darcy, and even
Miss Elizabeth herself, were, I am inclined to think, rather hard on him
for the “impropriety” of his conduct. His wife was evidently, and must
always have been, a quite irreclaimable fool; and unless he had shot her
or himself there was no way out of it for a man of sense and spirit but
the ironic. From no other point of view is he open to any reproach,
except for an excusable and not unnatural helplessness at the crisis of
the elopement, and his utterances are the most acutely delightful in the
consciously humorous kind--in the kind that we laugh with, not at--that
even Miss Austen has put into the mouth of any of her characters. It is
difficult to know whether he is most agreeable when talking to his wife,
or when putting Mr. Collins through his paces; but the general sense of
the world has probably been right in preferring to the first rank his
consolation to the former when she maunders over the entail, “My dear,
do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for better things.
Let us flatter ourselves that_ I _may be the survivor;” and his inquiry
to his colossal cousin as to the compliments which Mr. Collins has just
related as made by himself to Lady Catherine, “May I ask whether these
pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the
result of previous study?” These are the things which give Miss Austen’s
readers the pleasant shocks, the delightful thrills, which are felt by
the readers of Swift, of Fielding, and we may here add, of Thackeray, as
they are felt by the readers of no other English author of fiction
outside of these four._

_The goodness of the minor characters in_ Pride and Prejudice _has been
already alluded to, and it makes a detailed dwelling on their beauties
difficult in any space, and impossible in this. Mrs. Bennet we have
glanced at, and it is not easy to say whether she is more exquisitely
amusing or more horribly true. Much the same may be said of Kitty and
Lydia; but it is not every author, even of genius, who would have
differentiated with such unerring skill the effects of folly and
vulgarity of intellect and disposition working upon the common
weaknesses of woman at such different ages. With Mary, Miss Austen has
taken rather less pains, though she has been even more unkind to her;
not merely in the text, but, as we learn from those interesting
traditional appendices which Mr. Austen Leigh has given us, in dooming
her privately to marry “one of Mr. Philips’s clerks.” The habits of
first copying and then retailing moral sentiments, of playing and
singing too long in public, are, no doubt, grievous and criminal; but
perhaps poor Mary was rather the scapegoat of the sins of blue stockings
in that Fordyce-belectured generation. It is at any rate difficult not
to extend to her a share of the respect and affection (affection and
respect of a peculiar kind; doubtless), with which one regards Mr.
Collins, when she draws the moral of Lydia’s fall. I sometimes wish
that the exigencies of the story had permitted Miss Austen to unite
these personages, and thus at once achieve a notable mating and soothe
poor Mrs. Bennet’s anguish over the entail._

_The Bingleys and the Gardiners and the Lucases, Miss Darcy and Miss de
Bourgh, Jane, Wickham, and the rest, must pass without special comment,
further than the remark that Charlotte Lucas (her egregious papa, though
delightful, is just a little on the thither side of the line between
comedy and farce) is a wonderfully clever study in drab of one kind, and
that Wickham (though something of Miss Austen’s hesitation of touch in
dealing with young men appears) is a not much less notable sketch in
drab of another. Only genius could have made Charlotte what she is, yet
not disagreeable; Wickham what he is, without investing him either with
a cheap Don Juanish attractiveness or a disgusting rascality. But the
hero and the heroine are not tints to be dismissed._

_Darcy has always seemed to me by far the best and most interesting of
Miss Austen’s heroes; the only possible competitor being Henry Tilney,
whose part is so slight and simple that it hardly enters into
comparison. It has sometimes, I believe, been urged that his pride is
unnatural at first in its expression and later in its yielding, while
his falling in love at all is not extremely probable. Here again I
cannot go with the objectors. Darcy’s own account of the way in which
his pride had been pampered, is perfectly rational and sufficient; and
nothing could be, psychologically speaking, a_ causa verior _for its
sudden restoration to healthy conditions than the shock of Elizabeth’s
scornful refusal acting on a nature_ ex hypothesi _generous. Nothing in
even our author is finer and more delicately touched than the change of
his demeanour at the sudden meeting in the grounds of Pemberley. Had he
been a bad prig or a bad coxcomb, he might have been still smarting
under his rejection, or suspicious that the girl had come
husband-hunting. His being neither is exactly consistent with the
probable feelings of a man spoilt in the common sense, but not really
injured in disposition, and thoroughly in love. As for his being in
love, Elizabeth has given as just an exposition of the causes of that
phenomenon as Darcy has of the conditions of his unregenerate state,
only she has of course not counted in what was due to her own personal
charm._

_The secret of that charm many men and not a few women, from Miss Austen
herself downwards, have felt, and like most charms it is a thing rather
to be felt than to be explained. Elizabeth of course belongs to the_
allegro _or_ allegra _division of the army of Venus. Miss Austen was
always provokingly chary of description in regard to her beauties; and
except the fine eyes, and a hint or two that she had at any rate
sometimes a bright complexion, and was not very tall, we hear nothing
about her looks. But her chief difference from other heroines of the
lively type seems to lie first in her being distinctly clever--almost
strong-minded, in the better sense of that objectionable word--and
secondly in her being entirely destitute of ill-nature for all her
propensity to tease and the sharpness of her tongue. Elizabeth can give
at least as good as she gets when she is attacked; but she never
“scratches,” and she never attacks first. Some of the merest
obsoletenesses of phrase and manner give one or two of her early
speeches a slight pertness, but that is nothing, and when she comes to
serious business, as in the great proposal scene with Darcy (which is,
as it should be, the climax of the interest of the book), and in the
final ladies’ battle with Lady Catherine, she is unexceptionable. Then
too she is a perfectly natural girl. She does not disguise from herself
or anybody that she resents Darcy’s first ill-mannered personality with
as personal a feeling. (By the way, the reproach that the ill-manners of
this speech are overdone is certainly unjust; for things of the same
kind, expressed no doubt less stiltedly but more coarsely, might have
been heard in more than one ball-room during this very year from persons
who ought to have been no worse bred than Darcy.) And she lets the
injury done to Jane and the contempt shown to the rest of her family
aggravate this resentment in the healthiest way in the world._

_Still, all this does not explain her charm, which, taking beauty as a
common form of all heroines, may perhaps consist in the addition to her
playfulness, her wit, her affectionate and natural disposition, of a
certain fearlessness very uncommon in heroines of her type and age.
Nearly all of them would have been in speechless awe of the magnificent
Darcy; nearly all of them would have palpitated and fluttered at the
idea of proposals, even naughty ones, from the fascinating Wickham.
Elizabeth, with nothing offensive, nothing_ viraginous, _nothing of the
“New Woman” about her, has by nature what the best modern (not “new”)
women have by education and experience, a perfect freedom from the idea
that all men may bully her if they choose, and that most will away with
her if they can. Though not in the least “impudent and mannish grown,”
she has no mere sensibility, no nasty niceness about her. The form of
passion common and likely to seem natural in Miss Austen’s day was so
invariably connected with the display of one or the other, or both of
these qualities, that she has not made Elizabeth outwardly passionate.
But I, at least, have not the slightest doubt that she would have
married Darcy just as willingly without Pemberley as with it, and
anybody who can read between lines will not find the lovers’
conversations in the final chapters so frigid as they might have looked
to the Della Cruscans of their own day, and perhaps do look to the Della
Cruscans of this._

_And, after all, what is the good of seeking for the reason of
charm?--it is there. There were better sense in the sad mechanic
exercise of determining the reason of its absence where it is not. In
the novels of the last hundred years there are vast numbers of young
ladies with whom it might be a pleasure to fall in love; there are at
least five with whom, as it seems to me, no man of taste and spirit can
help doing so. Their names are, in chronological order, Elizabeth
Bennet, Diana Vernon, Argemone Lavington, Beatrix Esmond, and Barbara
Grant. I should have been most in love with Beatrix and Argemone; I
should, I think, for mere occasional companionship, have preferred Diana
and Barbara. But to live with and to marry, I do not know that any one
of the four can come into competition with Elizabeth._

_GEORGE SAINTSBURY._

[Illustration: List of Illustrations.]

                                                                    PAGE

Frontispiece                                                          iv

Title-page                                                             v

Dedication                                                           vii

Heading to Preface                                                    ix

Heading to List of Illustrations                                     xxv

Heading to Chapter I.                                                  1

“He came down to see the place”                                        2

Mr. and Mrs. Bennet                                                    5

“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it”                                      6

“I’m the tallest”                                                      9

“He rode a black horse”                                               10

“When the party entered”                                              12

“She is tolerable”                                                    15

Heading to Chapter IV.                                                18

Heading to Chapter V.                                                 22

“Without once opening his lips”                                       24

Tailpiece to Chapter V.                                               26

Heading to Chapter VI.                                                27

“The entreaties of several”                                           31

“A note for Miss Bennet”                                              36

“Cheerful prognostics”                                                40

“The apothecary came”                                                 43

“Covering a screen”                                                   45

“Mrs. Bennet and her two youngest girls”                              53

Heading to Chapter X.                                                 60

“No, no; stay where you are”                                          67

“Piling up the fire”                                                  69

Heading to Chapter XII.                                               75

Heading to Chapter XIII.                                              78

Heading to Chapter XIV.                                               84

“Protested that he never read novels”                                 87

Heading to Chapter XV.                                                89

Heading to Chapter XVI.                                               95

“The officers of the ----shire”                                       97

“Delighted to see their dear friend again”                           108

Heading to Chapter XVIII.                                            113

“Such very superior dancing is not often seen”                       118

“To assure you in the most animated language”                        132

Heading to Chapter XX.                                               139

“They entered the breakfast-room”                                    143

Heading to Chapter XXI.                                              146

“Walked back with them”                                              148

Heading to Chapter XXII.                                             154

“So much love and eloquence”                                         156

“Protested he must be entirely mistaken”                             161

“Whenever she spoke in a low voice”                                  166

Heading to Chapter XXIV.                                             168

Heading to Chapter XXV.                                              175

“Offended two or three young ladies”                                 177

“Will you come and see me?”                                          181

“On the stairs”                                                      189

“At the door”                                                        194

“In conversation with the ladies”                                    198

“Lady Catherine,” said she, “you have given me a treasure”           200

Heading to Chapter XXX.                                              209

“He never failed to inform them”                                     211

“The gentlemen accompanied him”                                      213

Heading to Chapter XXXI.                                             215

Heading to Chapter XXXII.                                            221

“Accompanied by their aunt”                                          225

“On looking up”                                                      228

Heading to Chapter XXXIV.                                            235

“Hearing herself called”                                             243

Heading to Chapter XXXVI.                                            253

“Meeting accidentally in town”                                       256

“His parting obeisance”                                              261

“Dawson”                                                             263

“The elevation of his feelings”                                      267

“They had forgotten to leave any message”                            270

“How nicely we are crammed in!”                                      272

Heading to Chapter XL.                                               278

“I am determined never to speak of it again”                         283

“When Colonel Miller’s regiment went away”                           285

“Tenderly flirting”                                                  290

The arrival of the Gardiners                                         294

“Conjecturing as to the date”                                        301

Heading to Chapter XLIV.                                             318

“To make herself agreeable to all”                                   321

“Engaged by the river”                                               327

Heading to Chapter XLVI.                                             334

“I have not an instant to lose”                                      339

“The first pleasing earnest of their welcome”                        345

The Post                                                             359

“To whom I have related the affair”                                  363

Heading to Chapter XLIX.                                             368

“But perhaps you would like to read it”                              370

“The spiteful old ladies”                                            377

“With an affectionate smile”                                         385

“I am sure she did not listen”                                       393

“Mr. Darcy with him”                                                 404

“Jane happened to look round”                                        415

“Mrs. Long and her nieces”                                           420

“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak to you”                             422

Heading to Chapter LVI.                                              431

“After a short survey”                                               434

“But now it comes out”                                               442

“The efforts of his aunt”                                            448

“Unable to utter a syllable”                                         457

“The obsequious civility”                                            466

Heading to Chapter LXI.                                              472

The End                                                              476

[Illustration: ·PRIDE AND PREJUDICE·

Chapter I.]

It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession
of a good fortune must be in want of a wife.

However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his
first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds
of the surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful
property of some one or other of their daughters.

“My dear Mr. Bennet,” said his lady to him one day, “have you heard that
Netherfield Park is let at last?”

Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.

“But it is,” returned she; “for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she
told me all about it.”

Mr. Bennet made no answer.

“Do not you want to know who has taken it?” cried his wife, impatiently.

“_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it.”

[Illustration:

“He came down to see the place”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

This was invitation enough.

“Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
delighted with it that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is
to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be
in the house by the end of next week.”

“What is his name?”

“Bingley.”

“Is he married or single?”

“Oh, single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or
five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!”

“How so? how can it affect them?”

“My dear Mr. Bennet,” replied his wife, “how can you be so tiresome? You
must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.”

“Is that his design in settling here?”

“Design? Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he
_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as
soon as he comes.”

“I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go--or you may send
them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better; for as you are
as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the
party.”

“My dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but
I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five
grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty.”

“In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.”

“But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into
the neighbourhood.”

“It is more than I engage for, I assure you.”

“But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would
be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go,
merely on that account; for in general, you know, they visit no new
comers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to visit
him, if you do not.”

“You are over scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very
glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my
hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls--though
I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.”

“I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the
others: and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so
good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference.”

“They have none of them much to recommend them,” replied he: “they are
all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of
quickness than her sisters.”

“Mr. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way? You take
delight in vexing me. You have no compassion on my poor nerves.”

“You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They
are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration
these twenty years at least.”

“Ah, you do not know what I suffer.”

“But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four
thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.”

“It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not
visit them.”

“Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them
all.”

Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had
been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mind
was less difficult to develope. She was a woman of mean understanding,
little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented, she
fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her
daughters married: its solace was visiting and news.

[Illustration: M^{r.} & M^{rs.} Bennet

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

[Illustration:

“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER II.

[Illustration]

Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He
had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring his
wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was
paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following
manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he
suddenly addressed her with,--

“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.”

“We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes,” said her mother,
resentfully, “since we are not to visit.”

“But you forget, mamma,” said Elizabeth, “that we shall meet him at the
assemblies, and that Mrs. Long has promised to introduce him.”

“I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces
of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion
of her.”

“No more have I,” said Mr. Bennet; “and I am glad to find that you do
not depend on her serving you.”

Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply; but, unable to contain
herself, began scolding one of her daughters.

“Don’t keep coughing so, Kitty, for heaven’s sake! Have a little
compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.”

“Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,” said her father; “she times
them ill.”

“I do not cough for my own amusement,” replied Kitty, fretfully. “When
is your next ball to be, Lizzy?”

“To-morrow fortnight.”

“Ay, so it is,” cried her mother, “and Mrs. Long does not come back till
the day before; so, it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for
she will not know him herself.”

“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce
Mr. Bingley to _her_.”

“Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him
myself; how can you be so teasing?”

“I honour your circumspection. A fortnight’s acquaintance is certainly
very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a
fortnight. But if _we_ do not venture, somebody else will; and after
all, Mrs. Long and her nieces must stand their chance; and, therefore,
as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I
will take it on myself.”

The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, “Nonsense,
nonsense!”

“What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?” cried he. “Do
you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on
them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you,
Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and read
great books, and make extracts.”

Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew not how.

“While Mary is adjusting her ideas,” he continued, “let us return to Mr.
Bingley.”

“I am sick of Mr. Bingley,” cried his wife.

“I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did you not tell me so before? If I
had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on
him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we
cannot escape the acquaintance now.”

The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished--that of Mrs.
Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy
was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the
while.

“How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I should
persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to
neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! And it is such a
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said a
word about it till now.”

“Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,” said Mr. Bennet; and,
as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.

“What an excellent father you have, girls,” said she, when the door was
shut. “I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness;
or me either, for that matter. At our time of life, it is not so
pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but
for your sakes we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you _are_
the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next
ball.”

“Oh,” said Lydia, stoutly, “I am not afraid; for though I _am_ the
youngest, I’m the tallest.”

The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would
return Mr. Bennet’s visit, and determining when they should ask him to
dinner.

[Illustration: “I’m the tallest”]

[Illustration:

     “He rode a black horse”
]

CHAPTER III.

[Illustration]

Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five
daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her
husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him
in various ways, with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at
last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,
Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been
delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly
with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of
dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively
hopes of Mr. Bingley’s heart were entertained.

“If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,”
said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, “and all the others equally well
married, I shall have nothing to wish for.”

In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet’s visit, and sat about ten
minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being
admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard
much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining, from an upper
window, that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse.

An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards despatched; and already had
Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her
housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley
was obliged to be in town the following day, and consequently unable to
accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite
disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town
so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that
he might always be flying about from one place to another, and never
settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a
little by starting the idea of his

[Illustration:

     “When the Party entered”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball; and a
report soon followed that Mr. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and
seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a
number of ladies; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing
that, instead of twelve, he had brought only six with him from London,
his five sisters and a cousin. And when the party entered the
assembly-room, it consisted of only five altogether: Mr. Bingley, his
two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man.

Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike: he had a pleasant
countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women,
with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely
looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention
of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and
the report, which was in general circulation within five minutes after
his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen
pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he was
much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great
admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust
which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be
proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his
large estate in Derbyshire could save him from having a most forbidding,
disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his
friend.

Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal
people in the room: he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,
was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one
himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for
themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced
only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being
introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.
His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man in
the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.
Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of
his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his
having slighted one of her daughters.

Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit
down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been
standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and
Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes to press his
friend to join it.

“Come, Darcy,” said he, “I must have you dance. I hate to see you
standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better
dance.”

“I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am
particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this, it
would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to
stand up with.”

“I would not be so fastidious as you are,” cried Bingley, “for a
kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in my
life as I have this evening; and there are several of them, you see,
uncommonly pretty.”

“_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room,” said Mr.
Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.

“Oh, she is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is one
of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I
dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.”

[Illustration:

“She is tolerable”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Which do you mean?” and turning round, he looked for a moment at
Elizabeth, till, catching her eye, he withdrew his own, and coldly said,
“She is tolerable: but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; and I am in no
humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted
by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.”

Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth
remained with no very cordial feelings towards him. She told the story,
however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,
playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.

The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs.
Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield
party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been
distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as her
mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane’s
pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been
fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they
had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With a
book, he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a
good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised
such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that all his wife’s
views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found that he
had a very different story to hear.

“Oh, my dear Mr. Bennet,” as she entered the room, “we have had a most
delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there.
Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well
she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with
her twice. Only think of _that_, my dear: he actually danced with her
twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second
time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand
up with her; but, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody
can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going
down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and
asked her for the two next. Then, the two third he danced with Miss
King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane
again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_----”

“If he had had any compassion for _me_,” cried her husband impatiently,
“he would not have danced half so much! For God’s sake, say no more of
his partners. O that he had sprained his ancle in the first dance!”

“Oh, my dear,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “I am quite delighted with him. He
is so excessively handsome! and his sisters are charming women. I never
in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the
lace upon Mrs. Hurst’s gown----”

Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any
description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit, and some
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.

“But I can assure you,” she added, “that Lizzy does not lose much by not
suiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at
all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited, that there was no enduring
him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very
great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my
dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man.”

[Illustration]

CHAPTER IV.

[Illustration]

When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister how very much
she admired him.

“He is just what a young-man ought to be,” said she, “sensible,
good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners! so much ease,
with such perfect good breeding!”

“He is also handsome,” replied Elizabeth, “which a young man ought
likewise to be if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete.”

“I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I
did not expect such a compliment.”

“Did not you? _I_ did for you. But that is one great difference between
us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. What
could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help
seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in
the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is
very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a
stupider person.”

“Dear Lizzy!”

“Oh, you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.
You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable
in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life.”

“I would wish not to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak
what I think.”

“I know you do: and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
others! Affectation of candour is common enough; one meets with it
everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design,--to take the
good of everybody’s character and make it still better, and say nothing
of the bad,--belongs to you alone. And so, you like this man’s sisters,
too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his.”

“Certainly not, at first; but they are very pleasing women when you
converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep
his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
neighbour in her.”

Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced: their behaviour at
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and
with a judgment, too, unassailed by any attention to herself, she was
very little disposed to approve them. They were, in fact, very fine
ladies; not deficient in good-humour when they were pleased, nor in the
power of being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited.
They were rather handsome; had been educated in one of the first private
seminaries in town; had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds; were in the
habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people
of rank; and were, therefore, in every respect entitled to think well of
themselves and meanly of others. They were of a respectable family in
the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their
memories than that their brother’s fortune and their own had been
acquired by trade.

Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate,
but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and
sometimes made choice of his county; but, as he was now provided with a
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the
remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
purchase.

His sisters were very anxious for his having an estate of his own; but
though he was now established only as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no
means unwilling to preside at his table; nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had
married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider
his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of
age two years when he was tempted, by an accidental recommendation, to
look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it, for half an
hour; was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied
with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately.

Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of a
great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the
easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition
could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he
never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy’s regard, Bingley
had the firmest reliance, and of his judgment the highest opinion. In
understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means
deficient; but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,
reserved, and fastidious; and his manners, though well bred, were not
inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley
was sure of being liked wherever he appeared; Darcy was continually
giving offence.

The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently
characteristic. Bingley had never met with pleasanter people or prettier
girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him;
there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted
with all the room; and as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel
more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people
in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had
felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or
pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty; but she smiled too
much.

Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so; but still they admired
her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one whom
they should not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore
established as a sweet girl; and their brother felt authorized by such
commendation to think of her as he chose.

[Illustration: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER V.

[Illustration]

Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade
in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the
honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty. The
distinction had, perhaps, been felt too strongly. It had given him a
disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town;
and, quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about
a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge; where he
could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by
business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. For,
though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the
contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive,
friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St. James’s had made him
courteous.

Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest
of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was
Elizabeth’s intimate friend.

That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a
ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.

“_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Mrs. Bennet, with civil
self-command, to Miss Lucas. “_You_ were Mr. Bingley’s first choice.”

“Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.”

“Oh, you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be
sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed, I rather believe he
_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something
about Mr. Robinson.”

“Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson: did not
I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson’s asking him how he liked our Meryton
assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty
women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his
answering immediately to the last question, ‘Oh, the eldest Miss Bennet,
beyond a doubt: there cannot be two opinions on that point.’”

“Upon my word! Well, that was very decided, indeed--that does seem as
if--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.”

“_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza,” said
Charlotte. “Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,
is he? Poor Eliza! to be only just _tolerable_.”

“I beg you will not put it into Lizzy’s head to be vexed by his
ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite
a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he
sat close to her for half an hour without once opening his lips.”

[Illustration: “Without once opening his lips”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Are you quite sure, ma’am? Is not there a little mistake?” said Jane.
“I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.”

“Ay, because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
could not help answering her; but she said he seemed very angry at being
spoke to.”

“Miss Bingley told me,” said Jane, “that he never speaks much unless
among his intimate acquaintance. With _them_ he is remarkably
agreeable.”

“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very
agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it
was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had
heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had to come
to the ball in a hack chaise.”

“I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long,” said Miss Lucas, “but I
wish he had danced with Eliza.”

“Another time, Lizzy,” said her mother, “I would not dance with _him_,
if I were you.”

“I believe, ma’am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him.”

“His pride,” said Miss Lucas, “does not offend _me_ so much as pride
often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so
very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_
to be proud.”

“That is very true,” replied Elizabeth, “and I could easily forgive
_his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_.”

“Pride,” observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her
reflections, “is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have
ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be
proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of
ourselves; vanity to what we would have others think of us.”

“If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy,” cried a young Lucas, who came with his
sisters, “I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of
foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day.”

“Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought,” said Mrs.
Bennet; “and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle
directly.”

The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she
would; and the argument ended only with the visit.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

CHAPTER VI.

[Illustration]

The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit
was returned in due form. Miss Bennet’s pleasing manners grew on the
good-will of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was
found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to,
a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towards the
two eldest. By Jane this attention was received with the greatest
pleasure; but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of
everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;
though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value, as arising,
in all probability, from the influence of their brother’s admiration. It
was generally evident, whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her; and
to _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference
which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a
way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it
was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane
united with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and an
uniform cheerfulness of manner, which would guard her from the
suspicions of the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend, Miss
Lucas.

“It may, perhaps, be pleasant,” replied Charlotte, “to be able to impose
on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be
so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill
from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and
it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the
dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every
attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all
_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there are
very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without
encouragement. In nine cases out of ten, a woman had better show _more_
affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he
may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.”

“But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If _I_ can
perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton indeed not to
discover it too.”

“Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane’s disposition as you do.”

“But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavor to conceal
it, he must find it out.”

“Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But though Bingley and Jane
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and as they
always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that
every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should
therefore make the most of every half hour in which she can command his
attention. When she is secure of him, there will be leisure for falling
in love as much as she chooses.”

“Your plan is a good one,” replied Elizabeth, “where nothing is in
question but the desire of being well married; and if I were determined
to get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But
these are not Jane’s feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet she
cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard, nor of its
reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced four
dances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house,
and has since dined in company with him four times. This is not quite
enough to make her understand his character.”

“Not as you represent it. Had she merely _dined_ with him, she might
only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must
remember that four evenings have been also spent together--and four
evenings may do a great deal.”

“Yes: these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both
like Vingt-un better than Commerce, but with respect to any other
leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.”

“Well,” said Charlotte, “I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if
she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good a
chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a
twelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. If
the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other, or
ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the
least. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as
possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your
life.”

“You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not
sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.”

Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley’s attention to her sister, Elizabeth
was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some
interest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely
allowed her to be pretty: he had looked at her without admiration at the
ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no
sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she had
hardly a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered
uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To
this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had
detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry
in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and
pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those
of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of
this she was perfectly unaware: to her he was only the man who made
himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough
to dance with.

He began to wish to know more of her; and, as a step towards conversing
with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so
drew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas’s, where a large party were
assembled.

“What does Mr. Darcy mean,” said she to Charlotte, “by listening to my
conversation with Colonel Forster?”

“That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.”

“But if he does it any more, I shall certainly let him know that I see
what he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by
being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.”

[Illustration: “The entreaties of several” [_Copyright 1894 by George
Allen._]]

On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have
any intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention such
a subject to him, which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she
turned to him and said,--

“Did not you think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well
just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at
Meryton?”

“With great energy; but it is a subject which always makes a lady
energetic.”

“You are severe on us.”

“It will be _her_ turn soon to be teased,” said Miss Lucas. “I am going
to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.”

“You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting me
to play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had taken a
musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I would
really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of
hearing the very best performers.” On Miss Lucas’s persevering, however,
she added, “Very well; if it must be so, it must.” And gravely glancing
at Mr. Darcy, “There is a very fine old saying, which everybody here is
of course familiar with--‘Keep your breath to cool your porridge,’--and
I shall keep mine to swell my song.”

Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song
or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she
would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her
sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in
the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always
impatient for display.

Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her
application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited
manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she
had reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with
much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the
end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by
Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who with
some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in
dancing at one end of the room.

Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of
passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too
much engrossed by his own thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas
was his neighbour, till Sir William thus began:--

“What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! There is
nothing like dancing, after all. I consider it as one of the first
refinements of polished societies.”

“Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst
the less polished societies of the world: every savage can dance.”

Sir William only smiled. “Your friend performs delightfully,” he
continued, after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; “and I doubt
not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.”

“You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir.”

“Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do
you often dance at St. James’s?”

“Never, sir.”

“Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?”

“It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.”

“You have a house in town, I conclude?”

Mr. Darcy bowed.

“I had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself, for I am fond of
superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of
London would agree with Lady Lucas.”

He paused in hopes of an answer: but his companion was not disposed to
make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was
struck with the notion of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to
her,--

“My dear Miss Eliza, why are not you dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow
me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You
cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is before you.”
And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy, who, though
extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly
drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William,--

“Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you
not to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.”

Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of
her hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at
all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.

“You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny me
the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the
amusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us
for one half hour.”

“Mr. Darcy is all politeness,” said Elizabeth, smiling.

“He is, indeed: but considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we
cannot wonder at his complaisance; for who would object to such a
partner?”

Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not injured
her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some
complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley,--

“I can guess the subject of your reverie.”

“I should imagine not.”

“You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many
evenings in this manner,--in such society; and, indeed, I am quite of
your opinion. I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the
noise--the nothingness, and yet the self-importance, of all these
people! What would I give to hear your strictures on them!”

“Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more
agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure
which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.”

Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he
would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.
Mr. Darcy replied, with great intrepidity,--

“Miss Elizabeth Bennet.”

“Miss Elizabeth Bennet!” repeated Miss Bingley. “I am all astonishment.
How long has she been such a favourite? and pray when am I to wish you
joy?”

“That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady’s
imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love
to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.”

“Nay, if you are so serious about it, I shall consider the matter as
absolutely settled. You will have a charming mother-in-law, indeed, and
of course she will be always at Pemberley with you.”

He listened to her with perfect indifference, while she chose to
entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her
that all was safe, her wit flowed along.

[Illustration:

     “A note for Miss Bennet”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER VII.

[Illustration]

Mr. Bennet’s property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two
thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed,
in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother’s
fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply
the deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and
had left her four thousand pounds.

She had a sister married to a Mr. Philips, who had been a clerk to their
father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in
London in a respectable line of trade.

The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most
convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt, and
to a milliner’s shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family,
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions:
their minds were more vacant than their sisters’, and when nothing
better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning
hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and, however bare of
news the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn
some from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both
with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in
the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was
the head-quarters.

Their visits to Mrs. Philips were now productive of the most interesting
intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge of the
officers’ names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret,
and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr. Philips
visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a source of felicity
unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; and Mr.
Bingley’s large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their
mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of
an ensign.

After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.
Bennet coolly observed,--

“From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two
of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but
I am now convinced.”

Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect
indifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter, and
her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the
next morning to London.

“I am astonished, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet, “that you should be so
ready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightingly
of anybody’s children, it should not be of my own, however.”

“If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.”

“Yes; but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.”

“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I
had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must
so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly
foolish.”

“My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of
their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will
not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when I
liked a red coat myself very well--and, indeed, so I do still at my
heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year,
should want one of my girls, I shall not say nay to him; and I thought
Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William’s in
his regimentals.”

“Mamma,” cried Lydia, “my aunt says that Colonel Forster and Captain
Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson’s as they did when they first
came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke’s library.”

Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a
note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited
for an answer. Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was
eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,--

“Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well,
Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.”

“It is from Miss Bingley,” said Jane, and then read it aloud.

     /* NIND “My dear friend, */

     “If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and
     me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our
     lives; for a whole day’s _tête-à-tête_ between two women can never
     end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on the receipt of
     this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers.
     Yours ever,

“CAROLINE BINGLEY.”

“With the officers!” cried Lydia: “I wonder my aunt did not tell us of
_that_.”

“Dining out,” said Mrs. Bennet; “that is very unlucky.”

“Can I have the carriage?” said Jane.

“No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to
rain; and then you must stay all night.”

“That would be a good scheme,” said Elizabeth, “if you were sure that
they would not offer to send her home.”

“Oh, but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley’s chaise to go to Meryton;
and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.”

“I had much rather go in the coach.”

“But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They are
wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are not they?”

[Illustration: Cheerful prognostics]

“They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.”

“But if you have got them to-day,” said Elizabeth, “my mother’s purpose
will be answered.”

She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses
were engaged; Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her
mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad
day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before it
rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was
delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;
Jane certainly could not come back.

“This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!” said Mrs. Bennet, more than
once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the next
morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her
contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield
brought the following note for Elizabeth:--

     /* NIND “My dearest Lizzie, */

     “I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to be
     imputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will
     not hear of my returning home till I am better. They insist also on
     my seeing Mr. Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear
     of his having been to me--and, excepting a sore throat and a
     headache, there is not much the matter with me.

“Yours, etc.”

“Well, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note
aloud, “if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if she
should die--it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of
Mr. Bingley, and under your orders.”

“Oh, I am not at all afraid of her dying. People do not die of little
trifling colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays
there, it is all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the
carriage.”

Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, determined to go to her, though the
carriage was not to be had: and as she was no horsewoman, walking was
her only alternative. She declared her resolution.

“How can you be so silly,” cried her mother, “as to think of such a
thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you get
there.”

“I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.”

“Is this a hint to me, Lizzy,” said her father, “to send for the
horses?”

“No, indeed. I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing,
when one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner.”

“I admire the activity of your benevolence,” observed Mary, “but every
impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,
exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.”

“We will go as far as Meryton with you,” said Catherine and Lydia.
Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off
together.

“If we make haste,” said Lydia, as they walked along, “perhaps we may
see something of Captain Carter, before he goes.”

In Meryton they parted: the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one
of the officers’ wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing
field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing
over puddles, with impatient activity, and finding herself at last
within view of the house, with weary ancles, dirty stockings, and a face
glowing with the warmth of exercise.

She was shown into the breakfast parlour, where all but Jane were
assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.
That she should have walked three miles so early in the day in such
dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt
for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their
brother’s manners there was something better than politeness--there was
good-humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr. Hurst
nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the
brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion and doubt as to
the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was
thinking only of his breakfast.

Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss
Bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not well
enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving
alarm or inconvenience, from expressing in her note how much she longed
for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal,
however, to much conversation; and when Miss Bingley left them together,
could attempt little beside expressions of gratitude for the
extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended
her.

When breakfast was over, they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth
began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and
solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came; and having
examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught a
violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;
advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advice
was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head
ached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment, nor were
the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had in fact
nothing to do elsewhere.

When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very
unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only
wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern
at parting with her that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer
of the chaise into an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the
present. Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was
despatched to Longbourn, to acquaint the family with her stay, and bring
back a supply of clothes.

[Illustration:

“The Apothecary came”
]

[Illustration:

“covering a screen”
]

CHAPTER VIII.

[Illustration]

At five o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six
Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then
poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the
much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley, she could not make a very
favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing
this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their
indifference towards Jane, when not immediately before them, restored
Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her original dislike.

Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could
regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his
attentions to herself most pleasing; and they prevented her feeling
herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the
others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was
engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr.
Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to
eat, drink, and play at cards, who, when he found her prefer a plain
dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.

When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley
began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were
pronounced to be very bad indeed,--a mixture of pride and impertinence:
she had no conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst
thought the same, and added,--

“She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent
walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really
looked almost wild.”

“She did indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very
nonsensical to come at all! Why must _she_ be scampering about the
country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair so untidy, so blowzy!”

“Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep
in mud, I am absolutely certain, and the gown which had been let down to
hide it not doing its office.”

“Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,” said Bingley; “but this was
all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well
when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite
escaped my notice.”

“_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley; “and I am
inclined to think that you would not wish to see _your sister_ make such
an exhibition.”

“Certainly not.”

“To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is,
above her ancles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! what could she mean by
it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence,
a most country-town indifference to decorum.”

“It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,” said
Bingley.

“I am afraid, Mr. Darcy,” observed Miss Bingley, in a half whisper,
“that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine
eyes.”

“Not at all,” he replied: “they were brightened by the exercise.” A
short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again,--

“I have an excessive regard for Jane Bennet,--she is really a very sweet
girl,--and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such
a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no
chance of it.”

“I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in
Meryton?”

“Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.”

“That is capital,” added her sister; and they both laughed heartily.

“If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside,” cried Bingley, “it
would not make them one jot less agreeable.”

“But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any
consideration in the world,” replied Darcy.

To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their
hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of
their dear friend’s vulgar relations.

With a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired to her room on
leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.
She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till
late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep, and
when it appeared to her rather right than pleasant that she should go
down stairs herself. On entering the drawing-room, she found the whole
party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high, she declined it, and making her sister the
excuse, said she would amuse herself, for the short time she could stay
below, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.

“Do you prefer reading to cards?” said he; “that is rather singular.”

“Miss Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, “despises cards. She is a great
reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.”

“I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,” cried Elizabeth; “I
am _not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.”

“In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,” said Bingley; “and
I hope it will soon be increased by seeing her quite well.”

Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards a table
where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her
others; all that his library afforded.

“And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own
credit; but I am an idle fellow; and though I have not many, I have more
than I ever looked into.”

Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those
in the room.

“I am astonished,” said Miss Bingley, “that my father should have left
so small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have at
Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!”

“It ought to be good,” he replied: “it has been the work of many
generations.”

“And then you have added so much to it yourself--you are always buying
books.”

“I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as
these.”

“Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of
that noble place. Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may be
half as delightful as Pemberley.”

“I wish it may.”

“But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that
neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a
finer county in England than Derbyshire.”

“With all my heart: I will buy Pemberley itself, if Darcy will sell it.”

“I am talking of possibilities, Charles.”

“Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get
Pemberley by purchase than by imitation.”

Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to leave her very little
attention for her book; and, soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near
the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his eldest
sister, to observe the game.

“Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?” said Miss Bingley: “will
she be as tall as I am?”

“I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet’s height, or
rather taller.”

“How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me
so much. Such a countenance, such manners, and so extremely accomplished
for her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.”

“It is amazing to me,” said Bingley, “how young ladies can have patience
to be so very accomplished as they all are.”

“All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?”

“Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and
net purses. I scarcely know any one who cannot do all this; and I am
sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without
being informed that she was very accomplished.”

“Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,” said Darcy, “has
too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no
otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen; but I am very
far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I
cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen in the whole range of my
acquaintance that are really accomplished.”

“Nor I, I am sure,” said Miss Bingley.

“Then,” observed Elizabeth, “you must comprehend a great deal in your
idea of an accomplished woman.”

“Yes; I do comprehend a great deal in it.”

“Oh, certainly,” cried his faithful assistant, “no one can be really
esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met
with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing,
dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and, besides all
this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of
walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word
will be but half deserved.”

“All this she must possess,” added Darcy; “and to all she must yet add
something more substantial in the improvement of her mind by extensive
reading.”

“I am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished women.
I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.”

“Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all
this?”

“_I_ never saw such a woman. _I_ never saw such capacity, and taste, and
application, and elegance, as you describe, united.”

Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her
implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who
answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with
bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all
conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the
room.

“Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, “is
one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other
sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I daresay, it
succeeds; but, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.”

“Undoubtedly,” replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,
“there is meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescend
to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is
despicable.”

Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to
continue the subject.

Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and
that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones’s being sent for
immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could
be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most
eminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not so
unwilling to comply with their brother’s proposal; and it was settled
that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet
were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters
declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness,
however, by duets after supper; while he could find no better relief to
his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every
possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.

[Illustration:

M^{rs} Bennet and her two youngest girls

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER IX.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister’s room, and in the
morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the
inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his
sisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a
note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her
own judgment of her situation. The note was immediately despatched, and
its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her
two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.

Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been
very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was
not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her
restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She
would not listen, therefore, to her daughter’s proposal of being carried
home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think
it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss
Bingley’s appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all
attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes
that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.

“Indeed I have, sir,” was her answer. “She is a great deal too ill to be
moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass
a little longer on your kindness.”

“Removed!” cried Bingley. “It must not be thought of. My sister, I am
sure, will not hear of her removal.”

“You may depend upon it, madam,” said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,
“that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while she
remains with us.”

Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.

“I am sure,” she added, “if it was not for such good friends, I do not
know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a
vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is
always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest
temper I ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to
_her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect
over that gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that is
equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I
hope, though you have but a short lease.”

“Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he; “and therefore if I
should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five
minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.”

“That is exactly what I should have supposed of you,” said Elizabeth.

“You begin to comprehend me, do you?” cried he, turning towards her.

“Oh yes--I understand you perfectly.”

“I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen
through, I am afraid, is pitiful.”

“That is as it happens. It does not necessarily follow that a deep,
intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.”

“Lizzy,” cried her mother, “remember where you are, and do not run on in
the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.”

“I did not know before,” continued Bingley, immediately, “that you were
a studier of character. It must be an amusing study.”

“Yes; but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have at
least that advantage.”

“The country,” said Darcy, “can in general supply but few subjects for
such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and
unvarying society.”

“But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be
observed in them for ever.”

“Yes, indeed,” cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a
country neighbourhood. “I assure you there is quite as much of _that_
going on in the country as in town.”

Everybody was surprised; and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,
turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete
victory over him, continued her triumph,--

“I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for
my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal
pleasanter, is not it, Mr. Bingley?”

“When I am in the country,” he replied, “I never wish to leave it; and
when I am in town, it is pretty much the same. They have each their
advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.”

“Ay, that is because you have the right disposition. But that
gentleman,” looking at Darcy, “seemed to think the country was nothing
at all.”

“Indeed, mamma, you are mistaken,” said Elizabeth, blushing for her
mother. “You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not
such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town, which
you must acknowledge to be true.”

“Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with
many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few
neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.”

Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his
countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eye towards
Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of
saying something that might turn her mother’s thoughts, now asked her if
Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away.

“Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir
William is, Mr. Bingley--is not he? so much the man of fashion! so
genteel and so easy! He has always something to say to everybody. _That_
is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very
important and never open their mouths quite mistake the matter.”

“Did Charlotte dine with you?”

“No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For
my part, Mr. Bingley, _I_ always keep servants that can do their own
work; _my_ daughters are brought up differently. But everybody is to
judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls, I
assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that _I_ think
Charlotte so _very_ plain; but then she is our particular friend.”

“She seems a very pleasant young woman,” said Bingley.

“Oh dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself
has often said so, and envied me Jane’s beauty. I do not like to boast
of my own child; but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybody
better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own
partiality. When she was only fifteen there was a gentleman at my
brother Gardiner’s in town so much in love with her, that my
sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away.
But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he
wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were.”

“And so ended his affection,” said Elizabeth, impatiently. “There has
been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first
discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!”

“I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love,” said Darcy.

“Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is
strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I
am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.”

Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth
tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to
speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.
Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to
Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was
unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be
civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part,
indeed, without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and
soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of
her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to
each other during the whole visit; and the result of it was, that the
youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming
into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.

Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose
affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high
animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the
attentions of the officers, to whom her uncle’s good dinners and her
own easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was
very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the
ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be
the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer
to this sudden attack was delightful to her mother’s ear.

“I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and, when
your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of
the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing while she is ill?”

Lydia declared herself satisfied. “Oh yes--it would be much better to
wait till Jane was well; and by that time, most likely, Captain Carter
would be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball,” she
added, “I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel
Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not.”

Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned
instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations’ behaviour to the
remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of
all Miss Bingley’s witticisms on _fine eyes_.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER X.

[Illustration]

The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss
Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who
continued, though slowly, to mend; and, in the evening, Elizabeth joined
their party in the drawing-room. The loo table, however, did not appear.
Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching
the progress of his letter, and repeatedly calling off his attention by
messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and
Mrs. Hurst was observing their game.

Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in
attending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual
commendations of the lady either on his hand-writing, or on the evenness
of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern
with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was
exactly in unison with her opinion of each.

“How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!”

He made no answer.

“You write uncommonly fast.”

“You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.”

“How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a
year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!”

“It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of to yours.”

“Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.”

“I have already told her so once, by your desire.”

“I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I mend
pens remarkably well.”

“Thank you--but I always mend my own.”

“How can you contrive to write so even?”

He was silent.

“Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp,
and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful
little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss
Grantley’s.”

“Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At
present I have not room to do them justice.”

“Oh, it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do you
always write such charming long letters to her, Mr. Darcy?”

“They are generally long; but whether always charming, it is not for me
to determine.”

“It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with
ease cannot write ill.”

“That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,” cried her
brother, “because he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much
for words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?”

“My style of writing is very different from yours.”

“Oh,” cried Miss Bingley, “Charles writes in the most careless way
imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.”

“My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them; by which
means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.”

“Your humility, Mr. Bingley,” said Elizabeth, “must disarm reproof.”

“Nothing is more deceitful,” said Darcy, “than the appearance of
humility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an
indirect boast.”

“And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?”

“The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in
writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of
thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you
think at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything with
quickness is always much prized by the possessor, and often without any
attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs.
Bennet this morning, that if you ever resolved on quitting Netherfield
you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of
panegyric, of compliment to yourself; and yet what is there so very
laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business
undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?”

“Nay,” cried Bingley, “this is too much, to remember at night all the
foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour, I
believed what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this
moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless
precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.”

“I daresay you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you
would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite as
dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were
mounting your horse, a friend were to say, ‘Bingley, you had better stay
till next week,’ you would probably do it--you would probably not
go--and, at another word, might stay a month.”

“You have only proved by this,” cried Elizabeth, “that Mr. Bingley did
not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now much
more than he did himself.”

“I am exceedingly gratified,” said Bingley, “by your converting what my
friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am
afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means
intend; for he would certainly think the better of me if, under such a
circumstance, I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I
could.”

“Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intention
as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?”

“Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter--Darcy must speak for
himself.”

“You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine,
but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to
stand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet,
that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and
the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering
one argument in favour of its propriety.”

“To yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no merit
with you.”

“To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of
either.”

“You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of
friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make
one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason
one into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have
supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the
circumstance occurs, before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour
thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases, between friend and friend,
where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no
very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying
with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?”

“Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange
with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to
appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting
between the parties?”

“By all means,” cried Bingley; “let us hear all the particulars, not
forgetting their comparative height and size, for that will have more
weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure
you that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with
myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not
know a more awful object than Darcy on particular occasions, and in
particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening,
when he has nothing to do.”

Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was
rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly
resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her
brother for talking such nonsense.

“I see your design, Bingley,” said his friend. “You dislike an argument,
and want to silence this.”

“Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss
Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very
thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.”

“What you ask,” said Elizabeth, “is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr.
Darcy had much better finish his letter.”

Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.

When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth
for the indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with alacrity to
the pianoforte, and after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the
way, which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she
seated herself.

Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister; and while they were thus employed,
Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-books
that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy’s eyes were fixed
on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of
admiration to so great a man, and yet that he should look at her because
he disliked her was still more strange. She could only imagine, however,
at last, that she drew his notice because there was something about her
more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in
any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked
him too little to care for his approbation.

After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by a
lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near
Elizabeth, said to her,--

“Do you not feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an
opportunity of dancing a reel?”

She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some
surprise at her silence.

“Oh,” said she, “I heard you before; but I could not immediately
determine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say ‘Yes,’
that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always
delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of
their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell
you that I do not want to dance a reel at all; and now despise me if you
dare.”

“Indeed I do not dare.”

Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his
gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her
manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody, and Darcy had
never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He really
believed that, were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he
should be in some danger.

Miss Bingley saw, or suspected, enough to be jealous; and her great
anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some
assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.

She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of
their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.

“I hope,” said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery the
next day, “you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this
desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue;
and if you can compass it, to cure the younger girls of running after
the officers. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to
check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence,
which your lady possesses.”

[Illustration:

     “No, no; stay where you are”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?”

“Oh yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Philips be placed
in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the
judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different
lines. As for your Elizabeth’s picture, you must not attempt to have it
taken, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?”

“It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression; but their
colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be
copied.”

At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and
Elizabeth herself.

“I did not know that you intended to walk,” said Miss Bingley, in some
confusion, lest they had been overheard.

“You used us abominably ill,” answered Mrs. Hurst, “running away without
telling us that you were coming out.”

Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk
by herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness,
and immediately said,--

“This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the
avenue.”

But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them,
laughingly answered,--

“No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to
uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a
fourth. Good-bye.”

She then ran gaily off, rejoicing, as she rambled about, in the hope of
being at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recovered
as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.

[Illustration:

     “Piling up the fire”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER XI.

[Illustration]

When the ladies removed after dinner Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and
seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the drawing-room,
where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of
pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were
during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers
of conversation were considerable. They could describe an entertainment
with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their
acquaintance with spirit.

But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object;
Miss Bingley’s eyes were instantly turned towards Darcy, and she had
something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed
himself directly to Miss Bennet with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst
also made her a slight bow, and said he was “very glad;” but diffuseness
and warmth remained for Bingley’s salutation. He was full of joy and
attention. The first half hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she
should suffer from the change of room; and she removed, at his desire,
to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be farther from the
door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else.
Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great
delight.

When tea was over Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the
card-table--but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr.
Darcy did not wish for cards, and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open
petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the
silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr.
Hurst had, therefore, nothing to do but to stretch himself on one of the
sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book. Miss Bingley did the same;
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and
rings, joined now and then in her brother’s conversation with Miss
Bennet.

Miss Bingley’s attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr.
Darcy’s progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and she was
perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She
could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her
question and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be
amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the
second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, “How pleasant it
is to spend an evening in this way! I declare, after all, there is no
enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a
book! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not
an excellent library.”

No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and
cast her eyes round the room in quest of some amusement; when, hearing
her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly
towards him and said,--

“By the bye Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at
Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult
the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not
some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a
pleasure.”

“If you mean Darcy,” cried her brother, “he may go to bed, if he
chooses, before it begins; but as for the ball, it is quite a settled
thing, and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough I shall send
round my cards.”

“I should like balls infinitely better,” she replied, “if they were
carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably
tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much
more rational if conversation instead of dancing made the order of the
day.”

“Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say; but it would not be
near so much like a ball.”

Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards got up and walked about
the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at
whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the
desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more; and,
turning to Elizabeth, said,--

“Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a
turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so
long in one attitude.”

Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley
succeeded no less in the real object of her civility: Mr. Darcy looked
up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was
directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that
he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down
the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would
interfere. What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his
meaning--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him.

“Not at all,” was her answer; “but, depend upon it, he means to be
severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask
nothing about it.”

Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in
anything, and persevered, therefore, in requiring an explanation of his
two motives.

“I have not the smallest objection to explaining them,” said he, as soon
as she allowed him to speak. “You either choose this method of passing
the evening because you are in each other’s confidence, and have secret
affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures
appear to the greatest advantage in walking: if the first, I should be
completely in your way; and if the second, I can admire you much better
as I sit by the fire.”

“Oh, shocking!” cried Miss Bingley. “I never heard anything so
abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?”

“Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination,” said Elizabeth. “We
can all plague and punish one another. Tease him--laugh at him. Intimate
as you are, you must know how it is to be done.”

“But upon my honour I do _not_. I do assure you that my intimacy has not
yet taught me _that_. Tease calmness of temper and presence of mind! No,
no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will not expose
ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject. Mr.
Darcy may hug himself.”

“Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!” cried Elizabeth. “That is an
uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would
be a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintance. I dearly love a
laugh.”

“Miss Bingley,” said he, “has given me credit for more than can be. The
wisest and best of men,--nay, the wisest and best of their actions,--may
be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a
joke.”

“Certainly,” replied Elizabeth, “there are such people, but I hope I am
not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise or good. Follies
and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, _do_ divert me, I own, and I
laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely what
you are without.”

“Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study of
my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong
understanding to ridicule.”

“Such as vanity and pride.”

“Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride--where there is a real
superiority of mind--pride will be always under good regulation.”

Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.

“Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume,” said Miss Bingley;
“and pray what is the result?”

“I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it
himself without disguise.”

“No,” said Darcy, “I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough,
but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch
for. It is, I believe, too little yielding; certainly too little for the
convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of
others so soon as I ought, nor their offences against myself. My
feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper
would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost is lost for
ever.”

“_That_ is a failing, indeed!” cried Elizabeth. “Implacable resentment
_is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I
really cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me.”

“There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular
evil, a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.”

“And _your_ defect is a propensity to hate everybody.”

“And yours,” he replied, with a smile, “is wilfully to misunderstand
them.”

“Do let us have a little music,” cried Miss Bingley, tired of a
conversation in which she had no share. “Louisa, you will not mind my
waking Mr. Hurst.”

Her sister made not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was
opened; and Darcy, after a few moments’ recollection, was not sorry for
it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XII.

[Illustration]

In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
next morning to her mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for
them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on
her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
would exactly finish Jane’s week, could not bring herself to receive
them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
least not to Elizabeth’s wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs.
Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage
before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley
and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very
well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively
resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
contrary, of being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,
she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley’s carriage immediately, and at
length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.

The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was
said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on
Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was
then sorry that she had proposed the delay; for her jealousy and dislike
of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.

The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so
soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be
safe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where
she felt herself to be right.

To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence: Elizabeth had been at
Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked; and Miss
Bingley was uncivil to _her_ and more teasing than usual to himself. He
wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration
should _now_ escape him--nothing that could elevate her with the hope of
influencing his felicity; sensible that, if such an idea had been
suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight
in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke
ten words to her through the whole of Saturday: and though they were at
one time left by themselves for half an hour, he adhered most
conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.

On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost
all, took place. Miss Bingley’s civility to Elizabeth increased at last
very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to
see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most
tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of
the whole party in the liveliest spirits.

They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet
wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their
father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really
glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The
evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its
animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and
Elizabeth.

They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human
nature; and had some new extracts to admire and some new observations of
threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information
for them of a different sort. Much had been done, and much had been said
in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers
had dined lately with their uncle; a private had been flogged; and it
had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XIII

[Illustration]

“I hope, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at
breakfast the next morning, “that you have ordered a good dinner to-day,
because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.”

“Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure,
unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in; and I hope _my_ dinners
are good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home.”

“The person of whom I speak is a gentleman and a stranger.”

Mrs. Bennet’s eyes sparkled. “A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr.
Bingley, I am sure. Why, Jane--you never dropped a word of this--you sly
thing! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley.
But--good Lord! how unlucky! there is not a bit of fish to be got
to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell. I must speak to Hill this
moment.”

“It is _not_ Mr. Bingley,” said her husband; “it is a person whom I
never saw in the whole course of my life.”

This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being
eagerly questioned by his wife and five daughters at once.

After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus
explained:--“About a month ago I received this letter, and about a
fortnight ago I answered it; for I thought it a case of some delicacy,
and requiring early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who,
when I am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he
pleases.”

“Oh, my dear,” cried his wife, “I cannot bear to hear that mentioned.
Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing
in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own
children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago
to do something or other about it.”

Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the nature of an entail.
They had often attempted it before: but it was a subject on which Mrs.
Bennet was beyond the reach of reason; and she continued to rail
bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of
five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.

“It certainly is a most iniquitous affair,” said Mr. Bennet; “and
nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn.
But if you will listen to his letter, you may, perhaps, be a little
softened by his manner of expressing himself.”

“No, that I am sure I shall not: and I think it was very impertinent of
him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false
friends. Why could not he keep on quarrelling with you, as his father
did before him?”

“Why, indeed, he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that
head, as you will hear.”

     /* RIGHT “Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, _15th October_. */

“Dear Sir,

     “The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured
     father always gave me much uneasiness; and, since I have had the
     misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the
     breach: but, for some time, I was kept back by my own doubts,
     fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be
     on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased him to be
     at variance.”--‘There, Mrs. Bennet.’--“My mind, however, is now
     made up on the subject; for, having received ordination at Easter,
     I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of
     the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis
     de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the
     valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest
     endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her
     Ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies
     which are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman,
     moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing
     of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and on
     these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures of
     good-will are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my
     being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly
     overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered
     olive branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the
     means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to
     apologize for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make
     them every possible amends; but of this hereafter. If you should
     have no objection to receive me into your house, I propose myself
     the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Monday,
     November 18th, by four o’clock, and shall probably trespass on your
     hospitality till the Saturday se’nnight following, which I can do
     without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting
     to my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other
     clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day. I remain, dear sir,
     with respectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your
     well-wisher and friend,

“WILLIAM COLLINS.”

“At four o’clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,”
said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. “He seems to be a most
conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and, I doubt not, will
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
indulgent as to let him come to us again.”

“There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however; and, if
he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to
discourage him.”

“Though it is difficult,” said Jane, “to guess in what way he can mean
to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his
credit.”

Elizabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary deference for Lady
Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying
his parishioners whenever it were required.

“He must be an oddity, I think,” said she. “I cannot make him out. There
is something very pompous in his style. And what can he mean by
apologizing for being next in the entail? We cannot suppose he would
help it, if he could. Can he be a sensible man, sir?”

“No, my dear; I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the
reverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his
letter which promises well. I am impatient to see him.”

“In point of composition,” said Mary, “his letter does not seem
defective. The idea of the olive branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I
think it is well expressed.”

To Catherine and Lydia neither the letter nor its writer were in any
degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for
their mother, Mr. Collins’s letter had done away much of her ill-will,
and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which
astonished her husband and daughters.

Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great
politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need
of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall,
heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave and
stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seated
before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of
daughters, said he had heard much of their beauty, but that, in this
instance, fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not
doubt her seeing them all in due time well disposed of in marriage. This
gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs.
Bennet, who quarrelled with no compliments, answered most readily,--

“You are very kind, sir, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may
prove so; for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so
oddly.”

“You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.”

“Ah, sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you
must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such things,
I know, are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates
will go when once they come to be entailed.”

“I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and
could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing
forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come
prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more, but, perhaps,
when we are better acquainted----”

He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each
other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins’s admiration. The
hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised;
and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet’s
heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his
own future property. The dinner, too, in its turn, was highly admired;
and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellence of its
cookery was owing. But here he was set right by Mrs. Bennet, who assured
him, with some asperity, that they were very well able to keep a good
cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He begged
pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared
herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologize for about a
quarter of an hour.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XIV

[Illustration]

During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants
were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his
guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to
shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady
Catherine de Bourgh’s attention to his wishes, and consideration for his
comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen
better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him
to more than usual solemnity of manner; and with a most important aspect
he protested that he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a
person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himself
experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to
approve of both the discourses which he had already had the honour of
preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings,
and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of
quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
people, he knew, but _he_ had never seen anything but affability in her.
She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she
made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the
neighbourhood, nor to his leaving his parish occasionally for a week or
two to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him to
marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had
once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly
approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed
to suggest some herself,--some shelves in the closets upstairs.

“That is all very proper and civil, I am sure,” said Mrs. Bennet, “and I
dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies
in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?”

“The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane
from Rosings Park, her Ladyship’s residence.”

“I think you said she was a widow, sir? has she any family?”

“She has one only daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
extensive property.”

“Ah,” cried Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, “then she is better off than
many girls. And what sort of young lady is she? Is she handsome?”

“She is a most charming young lady, indeed. Lady Catherine herself says
that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the
handsomest of her sex; because there is that in her features which marks
the young woman of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly
constitution, which has prevented her making that progress in many
accomplishments which she could not otherwise have failed of, as I am
informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still
resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends
to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.”

“Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at
court.”

“Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town;
and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine myself one day, has deprived
the British Court of its brightest ornament. Her Ladyship seemed pleased
with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to
offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to
ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her
charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess; and that the most
elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by
her. These are the kind of little things which please her Ladyship, and
it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to
pay.”

“You judge very properly,” said Mr. Bennet; “and it is happy for you
that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask
whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the
moment, or are the result of previous study?”

“They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time; and though I
sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant
compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to
give them as unstudied an air as possible.”

Mr. Bennet’s expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurd
as he had hoped; and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,
maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,
and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner
in his pleasure.

By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad
to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and when tea was over,
glad to invite him

[Illustration:

“Protested
that he never read novels”      H.T Feb 94
]

to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily assented, and a book
was produced; but on beholding it (for everything announced it to be
from a circulating library) he started back, and, begging pardon,
protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia
exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some deliberation he
chose “Fordyce’s Sermons.” Lydia gaped as he opened the volume; and
before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she
interrupted him with,--

“Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Philips talks of turning away
Richard? and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told me
so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more
about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town.”

Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr.
Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said,--

“I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books
of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes
me, I confess; for certainly there can be nothing so advantageous to
them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin.”

Then, turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at
backgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted
very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements. Mrs.
Bennet and her daughters apologized most civilly for Lydia’s
interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would
resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his
young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any
affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared
for backgammon.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XV.

[Illustration]

Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had
been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part of
his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and
miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he
had merely kept the necessary terms without forming at it any useful
acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had
given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a good
deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in
retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected
prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de
Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he
felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness,
mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a
clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of
pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.

Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to
marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had
a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found
them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.
This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father’s
estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and
suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own
part.

His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet’s lovely face
confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what
was due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settled
choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter
of an hour’s _tête-à-tête_ with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a
conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally
to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress for it might be found at
Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general
encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. “As to
her _younger_ daughters, she could not take upon her to say--she could
not positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession;--her
_eldest_ daughter she must just mention--she felt it incumbent on her to
hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.”

Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soon
done--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally
next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.

Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have
two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of
the day before, was now high in her good graces.

Lydia’s intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten: every sister
except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,
at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,
and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed
him after breakfast, and there he would continue, nominally engaged with
one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr.
Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such
doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had been
always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told
Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room in the
house, he was used to be free from them there: his civility, therefore,
was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in their
walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker
than a reader, was extremely well pleased to close his large book, and
go.

In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his
cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention of
the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by _him_. Their eyes
were immediately wandering up the street in quest of the officers, and
nothing less than a very smart bonnet, indeed, or a really new muslin in
a shop window, could recall them.

But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom
they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking
with an officer on the other side of the way. The officer was the very
Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came to inquire, and
he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the stranger’s air, all
wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible
to find out, led the way across the street, under pretence of wanting
something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the
pavement, when the two gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same
spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to
introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with him the day
before from town, and, he was happy to say, had accepted a commission in
their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted
only regimentals to make him completely charming. His appearance was
greatly in his favour: he had all the best parts of beauty, a fine
countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address. The introduction
was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation--a
readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the
whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably,
when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were
seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the ladies of the group
the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual
civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the
principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to Longbourn on
purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and
was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on Elizabeth, when they
were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger; and Elizabeth
happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other,
was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. Both changed colour,
one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham, after a few moments,
touched his hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy just deigned to return.
What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to imagine; it was
impossible not to long to know.

In another minute Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what
passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.

Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of
Mr. Philips’s house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia’s
pressing entreaties that they would come in, and even in spite of Mrs.
Philips’s throwing up the parlour window, and loudly seconding the
invitation.

Mrs. Philips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from
their recent absence, were particularly welcome; and she was eagerly
expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as their own
carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if
she had not happened to see Mr. Jones’s shopboy in the street, who had
told her that they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield,
because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility was claimed
towards Mr. Collins by Jane’s introduction of him. She received him with
her very best politeness, which he returned with as much more,
apologizing for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with
her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be
justified by his relationship to the young ladies who introduced him to
her notice. Mrs. Philips was quite awed by such an excess of good
breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put an end to
by exclamations and inquiries about the other, of whom, however, she
could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that Mr. Denny had
brought him from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant’s
commission in the ----shire. She had been watching him the last hour,
she said, as he walked up and down the street,--and had Mr. Wickham
appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation;
but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the
officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become “stupid,
disagreeable fellows.” Some of them were to dine with the Philipses the
next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.
Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn
would come in the evening. This was agreed to; and Mrs. Philips
protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery
tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such
delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.
Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured,
with unwearying civility, that they were perfectly needless.

As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass
between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or
both, had they appeared to be wrong, she could no more explain such
behaviour than her sister.

Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring Mrs.
Philips’s manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady
Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for
she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but had even
pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although
utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be
attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so
much attention in the whole course of his life.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XVI.

[Illustration]

As no objection was made to the young people’s engagement with their
aunt, and all Mr. Collins’s scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for
a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach
conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the
girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room,
that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle’s invitation, and was then in
the house.

When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr.
Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much
struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he
might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast parlour
at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much
gratification; but when Mrs. Philips understood from him what Rosings
was, and who was its proprietor, when she had listened to the
description of only one of Lady Catherine’s drawing-rooms, and found
that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all
the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison
with the housekeeper’s room.

In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,
with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and the
improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the
gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Philips a very attentive
listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she
heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as
soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin,
and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine
their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantel-piece, the
interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however.
The gentlemen did approach: and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,
Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking
of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration. The
officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable,
gentlemanlike set and the best of them were of the present party; but
Mr, Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and
walk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced stuffy uncle Philips,
breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.

[Illustration:

“The officers of the ----shire”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was
turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated
himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into
conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, and on the
probability of a rainy season, made her feel that the commonest,
dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the
skill of the speaker.

With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the
officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young
ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind
listener in Mrs. Philips, and was, by her watchfulness, most abundantly
supplied with coffee and muffin.

When the card tables were placed, he had an opportunity of obliging her,
in return, by sitting down to whist.

“I know little of the game at present,” said he, “but I shall be glad to
improve myself; for in my situation of life----” Mrs. Philips was very
thankful for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.

Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he
received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there
seemed danger of Lydia’s engrossing him entirely, for she was a most
determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets,
she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets
and exclaiming after prizes, to have attention for anyone in particular.
Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore
at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him,
though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told,
the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared not even
mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly
relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far
Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in
a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.

“About a month,” said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject
drop, added, “he is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, I
understand.”

“Yes,” replied Wickham; “his estate there is a noble one. A clear ten
thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person more capable of
giving you certain information on that head than myself--for I have been
connected with his family, in a particular manner, from my infancy.”

Elizabeth could not but look surprised.

“You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after
seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting
yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?”

“As much as I ever wish to be,” cried Elizabeth, warmly. “I have spent
four days in the same house with him, and I think him very
disagreeable.”

“I have no right to give _my_ opinion,” said Wickham, “as to his being
agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known him
too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for _me_ to
be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general
astonish--and, perhaps, you would not express it quite so strongly
anywhere else. Here you are in your own family.”

“Upon my word I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house in the
neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in
Hertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not find
him more favourably spoken of by anyone.”

“I cannot pretend to be sorry,” said Wickham, after a short
interruption, “that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond
their deserts; but with _him_ I believe it does not often happen. The
world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his
high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.”

“I should take him, even on _my_ slight acquaintance, to be an
ill-tempered man.”

Wickham only shook his head.

“I wonder,” said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, “whether he is
likely to be in this country much longer.”

“I do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of his going away when I
was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire will
not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.”

“Oh no--it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mr. Darcy. If _he_
wishes to avoid seeing _me_ he must go. We are not on friendly terms,
and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for
avoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim to all the world--a sense of
very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is.
His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men
that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be
in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a
thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has been
scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and
everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the
memory of his father.”

Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with
all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.

Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the
neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that he
had yet seen, and speaking of the latter, especially, with gentle but
very intelligible gallantry.

“It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,” he added,
“which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I know it to be a
most respectable, agreeable corps; and my friend Denny tempted me
further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great
attentions and excellent acquaintance Meryton had procured them.
Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and
my spirits will not bear solitude. I _must_ have employment and society.
A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have
now made it eligible. The church _ought_ to have been my profession--I
was brought up for the church; and I should at this time have been in
possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we
were speaking of just now.”

“Indeed!”

“Yes--the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best
living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.
I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply,
and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given
elsewhere.”

“Good heavens!” cried Elizabeth; “but how could _that_ be? How could his
will be disregarded? Why did not you seek legal redress?”

“There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to
give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the
intention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it--or to treat it as a merely
conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim
to it by extravagance, imprudence, in short, anything or nothing.
Certain it is that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I
was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no
less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really done
anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm unguarded temper, and I
may perhaps have sometimes spoken my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too
freely. I can recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very
different sort of men, and that he hates me.”

“This is quite shocking! He deserves to be publicly disgraced.”

“Some time or other he _will_ be--but it shall not be by _me_. Till I
can forget his father, I can never defy or expose _him_.”

Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than
ever as he expressed them.

“But what,” said she, after a pause, “can have been his motive? what can
have induced him to behave so cruelly?”

“A thorough, determined dislike of me--a dislike which I cannot but
attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me
less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father’s uncommon
attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had
not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sort
of preference which was often given me.”

“I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this--though I have never liked
him, I had not thought so very ill of him--I had supposed him to be
despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of
descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as
this!”

After a few minutes’ reflection, however, she continued, “I _do_
remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of
his resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper. His disposition
must be dreadful.”

“I will not trust myself on the subject,” replied Wickham; “_I_ can
hardly be just to him.”

Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, “To
treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his
father!” She could have added, “A young man, too, like _you_, whose very
countenance may vouch for your being amiable.” But she contented herself
with--“And one, too, who had probably been his own companion from
childhood, connected together, as I think you said, in the closest
manner.”

“We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest
part of our youth was passed together: inmates of the same house,
sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. _My_
father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Philips,
appears to do so much credit to; but he gave up everything to be of use
to the late Mr. Darcy, and devoted all his time to the care of the
Pemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most
intimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to
be under the greatest obligations to my father’s active superintendence;
and when, immediately before my father’s death, Mr. Darcy gave him a
voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it
to be as much a debt of gratitude to _him_ as of affection to myself.”

“How strange!” cried Elizabeth. “How abominable! I wonder that the very
pride of this Mr. Darcy has not made him just to you. If from no better
motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest,--for
dishonesty I must call it.”

“It _is_ wonderful,” replied Wickham; “for almost all his actions may be
traced to pride; and pride has often been his best friend. It has
connected him nearer with virtue than any other feeling. But we are none
of us consistent; and in his behaviour to me there were stronger
impulses even than pride.”

“Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?”

“Yes; it has often led him to be liberal and generous; to give his money
freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the
poor. Family pride, and _filial_ pride, for he is very proud of what his
father was, have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family, to
degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the
Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also _brotherly_ pride,
which, with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and
careful guardian of his sister; and you will hear him generally cried up
as the most attentive and best of brothers.”

“What sort of a girl is Miss Darcy?”

He shook his head. “I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain to
speak ill of a Darcy; but she is too much like her brother,--very, very
proud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond
of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she is
nothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen,
and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father’s death her
home has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her
education.”

After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not
help reverting once more to the first, and saying,--

“I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley. How can Mr. Bingley,
who seems good-humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,
be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you
know Mr. Bingley?”

“Not at all.”

“He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr.
Darcy is.”

“Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not
want abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth
his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is a
very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His pride
never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just,
sincere, rational, honourable, and, perhaps, agreeable,--allowing
something for fortune and figure.”

The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round
the other table, and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin
Elizabeth and Mrs. Philips. The usual inquiries as to his success were
made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every point;
but when Mrs. Philips began to express her concern thereupon, he assured
her, with much earnest gravity, that it was not of the least importance;
that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged she would not
make herself uneasy.

“I know very well, madam,” said he, “that when persons sit down to a
card table they must take their chance of these things,--and happily I
am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. There
are, undoubtedly, many who could not say the same; but, thanks to Lady
Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding
little matters.”

Mr. Wickham’s attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for
a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relations
were very intimately acquainted with the family of De Bourgh.

“Lady Catherine de Bourgh,” she replied, “has very lately given him a
living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to her
notice, but he certainly has not known her long.”

“You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy
were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy.”

“No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine’s
connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before
yesterday.”

“Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is
believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates.”

This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss
Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her
affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already
self-destined to another.

“Mr. Collins,” said she, “speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her
daughter; but, from some particulars that he has related of her
Ladyship, I suspect his gratitude misleads him; and that, in spite of
her being his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.”

“I believe her to be both in a great degree,” replied Wickham; “I have
not seen her for many years; but I very well remember that I never liked
her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the
reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe
she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from
her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride of her nephew, who
chooses that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of
the first class.”

Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and
they continued talking together with mutual satisfaction till supper put
an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr.
Wickham’s attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise of
Mrs. Philips’s supper party, but his manners recommended him to
everybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done
gracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She could
think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all
the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name as
they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia
talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the
fish she had won; and Mr. Collins, in describing the civility of Mr. and
Mrs. Philips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses
at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing
that he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well manage
before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.

[Illustration:

     “delighted to see their dear friend again”
]

CHAPTER XVII.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth related to Jane, the next day, what had passed between Mr.
Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern: she
knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr.
Bingley’s regard; and yet it was not in her nature to question the
veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The
possibility of his having really endured such unkindness was enough to
interest all her tender feelings; and nothing therefore remained to be
done but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and
throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be
otherwise explained.

“They have both,” said she, “been deceived, I dare say, in some way or
other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps
misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to
conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,
without actual blame on either side.”

“Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say in
behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the
business? Do clear _them_, too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of
somebody.”

“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my
opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light
it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father’s favourite in such a
manner,--one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is
impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his
character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so
excessively deceived in him? Oh no.”

“I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley’s being imposed on than that
Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last
night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not
so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his looks.”

“It is difficult, indeed--it is distressing. One does not know what to
think.”

“I beg your pardon;--one knows exactly what to think.”

But Jane could think with certainty on only one point,--that Mr.
Bingley, if he _had been_ imposed on, would have much to suffer when
the affair became public.

The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this
conversation passed, by the arrival of some of the very persons of whom
they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their
personal invitation for the long expected ball at Netherfield, which was
fixed for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see
their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and
repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their
separation. To the rest of the family they paid little attention;
avoiding Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth,
and nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from
their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and
hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet’s civilities.

The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every
female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in
compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered by
receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a
ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the
society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and
Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr.
Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy’s look
and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended
less on any single event, or any particular person; for though they
each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham,
he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball
was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that she
had no disinclination for it.

“While I can have my mornings to myself,” said she, “it is enough. I
think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.
Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who
consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for
everybody.”

Elizabeth’s spirits were so high on the occasion, that though she did
not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help asking
him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley’s invitation, and if he
did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening’s
amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no
scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke,
either from the Archbishop or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to
dance.

“I am by no means of opinion, I assure you,” said he, “that a ball of
this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people, can
have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing
myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair
cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of
soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially; a
preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right
cause, and not to any disrespect for her.”

Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being
engaged by Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins
instead!--her liveliness had been never worse timed. There was no help
for it, however. Mr. Wickham’s happiness and her own was perforce
delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins’s proposal accepted with as
good a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with his
gallantry, from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first
struck her, that _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthy of
being the mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.
The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing
civilities towards herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a
compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than
gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before
her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage
was exceedingly agreeable to _her_. Elizabeth, however, did not choose
to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the
consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and,
till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.

If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the
younger Miss Bennets would have been in a pitiable state at this time;
for, from the day of the invitation to the day of the ball, there was
such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton once. No
aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after; the very shoe-roses
for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some
trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement
of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on
Tuesday could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday
endurable to Kitty and Lydia.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XVIII.

[Illustration]

Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in
vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a
doubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certainty of
meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that
might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than
usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all
that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than
might be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose the
dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted, for Mr. Darcy’s
pleasure, in the Bingleys’ invitation to the officers; and though this
was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was
pronounced by his friend Mr. Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and
who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business
the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant
smile,--

“I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if
he had not wished to avoid a certain gentleman here.”

This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by
Elizabeth; and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable for
Wickham’s absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling
of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate
disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to
the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.
Attention, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She
was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away
with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in
speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.

But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect
of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her
spirits; and, having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she
had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary
transition to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her
particular notice. The two first dances, however, brought a return of
distress: they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and
solemn, apologizing instead of attending, and often moving wrong
without being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a
disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her
release from him was ecstasy.

She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of
Wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those dances
were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with
her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy, who took
her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without
knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away again
immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of
mind: Charlotte tried to console her.

“I dare say you will find him very agreeable.”

“Heaven forbid! _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find
a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an
evil.”

When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her
hand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her, in a whisper, not to be a
simpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant
in the eyes of a man often times his consequence. Elizabeth made no
answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which
she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and
reading in her neighbours’ looks their equal amazement in beholding it.
They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to
imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and, at
first, was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it
would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk,
she made some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again
silent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time,
with--

“It is _your_ turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. _I_ talked about the
dance, and _you_ ought to make some kind of remark on the size of the
room, or the number of couples.”

He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be
said.

“Very well; that reply will do for the present. Perhaps, by-and-by, I
may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones; but
_now_ we may be silent.”

“Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?”

“Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be
entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet, for the advantage of
_some_, conversation ought to be so arranged as that they may have the
trouble of saying as little as possible.”

“Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you
imagine that you are gratifying mine?”

“Both,” replied Elizabeth archly; “for I have always seen a great
similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial,
taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say
something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
posterity with all the _éclat_ of a proverb.”

“This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,”
said he. “How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend to say. _You_
think it a faithful portrait, undoubtedly.”

“I must not decide on my own performance.”

He made no answer; and they were again silent till they had gone down
the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often
walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative; and, unable to resist
the temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had just
been forming a new acquaintance.”

The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread his
features, but he said not a word; and Elizabeth, though blaming herself
for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a
constrained manner said,--

“Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may insure his
_making_ friends; whether he may be equally capable of _retaining_ them,
is less certain.”

“He has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,” replied Elizabeth,
with emphasis, “and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all
his life.”

Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At
that moment Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass
through the set to the other side of the room; but, on perceiving Mr.
Darcy, he stopped, with a bow of superior courtesy, to compliment him on
his dancing and his partner.

“I have been most highly gratified, indeed, my dear sir; such very
superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the
first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not
disgrace you: and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated,
especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Miss Eliza (glancing
at her sister and Bingley), shall take place. What congratulations will
then flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy;--but let me not interrupt you, sir.
You will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of
that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”

[Illustration:

“Such very superior dancing is not
often seen.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir
William’s allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his
eyes were directed, with a very serious expression, towards Bingley and
Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly,
he turned to his partner, and said,--

“Sir William’s interruption has made me forget what we were talking
of.”

“I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have
interrupted any two people in the room who had less to say for
themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without success,
and what we are to talk of next I cannot imagine.”

“What think you of books?” said he, smiling.

“Books--oh no!--I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same
feelings.”

“I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be
no want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.”

“No--I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of
something else.”

“The _present_ always occupies you in such scenes--does it?” said he,
with a look of doubt.

“Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what she said; for her
thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared
by her suddenly exclaiming, “I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy,
that you hardly ever forgave;--that your resentment, once created, was
unappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its _being
created_?”

“I am,” said he, with a firm voice.

“And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?”

“I hope not.”

“It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion,
to be secure of judging properly at first.”

“May I ask to what these questions tend?”

“Merely to the illustration of _your_ character,” said she, endeavouring
to shake off her gravity. “I am trying to make it out.”

“And what is your success?”

She shook her head. “I do not get on at all. I hear such different
accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.”

“I can readily believe,” answered he, gravely, “that reports may vary
greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you were
not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to
fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”

“But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another
opportunity.”

“I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,” he coldly replied.
She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in
silence; on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree; for
in Darcy’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her,
which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against
another.

They had not long separated when Miss Bingley came towards her, and,
with an expression of civil disdain, thus accosted her,--

“So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham?
Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand
questions; and I find that the young man forgot to tell you, among his
other communications, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late Mr.
Darcy’s steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give
implicit confidence to all his assertions; for, as to Mr. Darcy’s using
him ill, it is perfectly false: for, on the contrary, he has been always
remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treated Mr. Darcy in a
most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but I know very
well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to blame; that he cannot bear
to hear George Wickham mentioned; and that though my brother thought he
could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he
was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way.
His coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and
I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this
discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his
descent, one could not expect much better.”

“His guilt and his descent appear, by your account, to be the same,”
said Elizabeth, angrily; “for I have heard you accuse him of nothing
worse than of being the son of Mr. Darcy’s steward, and of _that_, I can
assure you, he informed me himself.”

“I beg your pardon,” replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer.
“Excuse my interference; it was kindly meant.”

“Insolent girl!” said Elizabeth to herself. “You are much mistaken if
you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I see
nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr.
Darcy.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make
inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of
such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently
marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening.
Elizabeth instantly read her feelings; and, at that moment, solicitude
for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave
way before the hope of Jane’s being in the fairest way for happiness.

“I want to know,” said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her
sister’s, “what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you have
been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person, in which case
you may be sure of my pardon.”

“No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him; but I have nothing
satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of his
history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have
principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct,
the probity and honour, of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that
Mr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he has
received; and I am sorry to say that by his account, as well as his
sister’s, Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am
afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy’s
regard.”

“Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself.”

“No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.”

“This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I am
perfectly satisfied. But what does he say of the living?”

“He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard
them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to
him _conditionally_ only.”

“I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly,
“but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Mr.
Bingley’s defence of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but
since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt
the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture still to think of
both gentlemen as I did before.”

She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on
which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with
delight to the happy though modest hopes which Jane entertained of
Bingley’s regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence
in it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew
to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last
partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them,
and told her with great exultation, that he had just been so fortunate
as to make a most important discovery.

“I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there is now
in the room a near relation to my patroness. I happened to overhear the
gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of
this house the names of his cousin Miss De Bourgh, and of her mother,
Lady Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would
have thought of my meeting with--perhaps--a nephew of Lady Catherine de
Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made
in time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going to do,
and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total
ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”

“You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy?”

“Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier.
I believe him to be Lady Catherine’s _nephew_. It will be in my power to
assure him that her Ladyship was quite well yesterday se’nnight.”

Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme; assuring him
that Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as
an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that it
was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either
side, and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in
consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to her with
the determined air of following his own inclination, and when she ceased
speaking, replied thus,--

“My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world of your
excellent judgment in all matters within the scope of your
understanding, but permit me to say that there must be a wide difference
between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity and those
which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider
the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank
in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the
same time maintained. You must, therefore, allow me to follow the
dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which lead me to perform
what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by
your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide,
though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by education
and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like
yourself;” and with a low bow he left her to attack Mr. Darcy, whose
reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at
being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced his speech with
a solemn bow, and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if
hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,”
“Hunsford,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.” It vexed her to see him
expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing him with
unrestrained wonder; and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him to speak,
replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however, was not
discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy’s contempt seemed
abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech; and at the
end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way: Mr.
Collins then returned to Elizabeth.

“I have no reason, I assure you,” said he, “to be dissatisfied with my
reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered
me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying,
that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine’s discernment as to be
certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very
handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”

As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned
her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the
train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to made
her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that
very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could
bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring
even to like Bingley’s two sisters. Her mother’s thoughts she plainly
saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her,
lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore,
she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within
one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was
talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing
else but of her expectation that Jane would be soon married to Mr.
Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennet seemed incapable
of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match. His being such
a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from them,
were the first points of self-gratulation; and then it was such a
comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of Jane, and to be
certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It
was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as
Jane’s marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men;
and, lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to
consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that she might
not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It was necessary
to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such
occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs.
Bennet to find comfort in staying at home at any period of her life. She
concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally
fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no
chance of it.

In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother’s
words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible
whisper; for to her inexpressible vexation she could perceive that the
chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her
mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.

“What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am
sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say
nothing _he_ may not like to hear.”

“For heaven’s sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be to you
to offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by
so doing.”

Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would
talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and
blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently
glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what
she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was
convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expression
of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and
steady gravity.

At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who
had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no
likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken.
Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of
tranquillity; for when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she
had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty,
preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent
entreaties did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of
complaisance,--but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an
opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song.
Elizabeth’s eyes were fixed on her, with most painful sensations; and
she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience
which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving
amongst the thanks of the table the hint of a hope that she might be
prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute
began another. Mary’s powers were by no means fitted for such a display;
her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies.
She looked at Jane to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly
talking to Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making
signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,
impenetrably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his
interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint,
and, when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud,--

“That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough.
Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.”

Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and
Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father’s speech, was afraid
her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.

“If I,” said Mr. Collins, “were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I
should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an
air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly
compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however,
to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to
music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The
rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make such
an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not
offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time
that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care
and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making
as comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importance
that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards
everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I
cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who
should omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody
connected with the family.” And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded
his speech, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the
room. Many stared--many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr.
Bennet himself, while his wife seriously commended Mr. Collins for
having spoken so sensibly, and observed, in a half-whisper to Lady
Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.

To Elizabeth it appeared, that had her family made an agreement to
expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would
have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit, or
finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister
that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his
feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he
must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should
have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations was bad enough; and
she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or
the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.

The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by
Mr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side; and though he
could not prevail with her to dance with him again, put it out of her
power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with
somebody else, and offered to introduce him to any young lady in the
room. He assured her that, as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent
to it; that his chief object was, by delicate attentions, to recommend
himself to her; and that he should therefore make a point of remaining
close to her the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a
project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who
often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins’s conversation
to herself.

She was at least free from the offence of Mr. Darcy’s further notice:
though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite
disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the
probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in
it.

The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart; and by a
manœuvre of Mrs. Bennet had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an
hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how
heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her
sister scarcely opened their mouths except to complain of fatigue, and
were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed
every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and, by so doing, threw a
languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long
speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his
sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and
politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said
nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.
Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together a little detached from the
rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a
silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too
much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord,
how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.

When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly
civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn; and
addressed herself particularly to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy
he would make them, by eating a family dinner with them at any time,
without the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful
pleasure; and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of
waiting on her after his return from London, whither he was obliged to
go the next day for a short time.

Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied; and quitted the house under the
delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of
settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly
see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four
months. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins she thought
with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure.
Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the
man and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each
was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.

[Illustration:

     “to assure you in the most animated language”
]

CHAPTER XIX.

[Illustration]

The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made his
declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as
his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having
no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the
moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the
observances which he supposed a regular part of the business. On finding
Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon
after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words,--

“May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth,
when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the
course of this morning?”

Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs.
Bennet instantly answered,--

“Oh dear! Yes, certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be very happy--I am sure
she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you upstairs.” And
gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth
called out,--

“Dear ma’am, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse
me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am
going away myself.”

“No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you will stay where you are.” And
upon Elizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about
to escape, she added, “Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing
Mr. Collins.”

Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction; and a moment’s
consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it
over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again, and tried
to conceal, by incessant employment, the feelings which were divided
between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as
soon as they were gone, Mr. Collins began,--

“Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from
doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You
would have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this little
unwillingness; but allow me to assure you that I have your respected
mother’s permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the purport
of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to
dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as
soon as I entered the house I singled you out as the companion of my
future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this
subject, perhaps it will be advisable for me to state my reasons for
marrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design
of selecting a wife, as I certainly did.”

The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away
with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing that she could not
use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him farther, and
he continued,--

“My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for
every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example
of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced it will add
very greatly to my happiness; and, thirdly, which perhaps I ought to
have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and
recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling
patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked
too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I
left Hunsford,--between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was
arranging Miss De Bourgh’s footstool,--that she said, ‘Mr. Collins, you
must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choose a
gentlewoman for _my_ sake, and for your _own_; let her be an active,
useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small
income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as
you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.’ Allow me, by the
way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and
kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the
advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond
anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be
acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect
which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general
intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views
were directed to Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I
assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that
being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured
father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy
myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that
the loss to them might be as little as possible when the melancholy
event takes place--which, however, as I have already said, may not be
for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and I
flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing
remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the
violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and
shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well
aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds
in the 4 per cents., which will not be yours till after your mother’s
decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head,
therefore, I shall be uniformly silent: and you may assure yourself that
no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married.”

It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.

“You are too hasty, sir,” she cried. “You forget that I have made no
answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for
the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of
your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than decline
them.”

“I am not now to learn,” replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the
hand, “that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the
man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their
favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second or even a
third time. I am, therefore, by no means discouraged by what you have
just said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.”

“Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is rather an
extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not
one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so
daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second
time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make _me_
happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who
would make _you_ so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I
am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the
situation.”

“Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,” said Mr. Collins,
very gravely--“but I cannot imagine that her Ladyship would at all
disapprove of you. And you may be certain that when I have the honour of
seeing her again I shall speak in the highest terms of your modesty,
economy, and other amiable qualifications.”

“Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must
give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of
believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by
refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.
In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your
feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn
estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be
considered, therefore, as finally settled.” And rising as she thus
spoke, she would have quitted the room, had not Mr. Collins thus
addressed her,--

“When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I
shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given
me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I
know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the
first application, and, perhaps, you have even now said as much to
encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the
female character.”

“Really, Mr. Collins,” cried Elizabeth, with some warmth, “you puzzle me
exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form
of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as
may convince you of its being one.”

“You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your
refusal of my addresses are merely words of course. My reasons for
believing it are briefly these:--It does not appear to me that my hand
is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer
would be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my
connections with the family of De Bourgh, and my relationship to your
own, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into
further consideration that, in spite of your manifold attractions, it is
by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you.
Your portion is unhappily so small, that it will in all likelihood undo
the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must,
therefore, conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, I
shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by
suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.”

“I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind
of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I would
rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you
again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but
to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect
forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant
female intending to plague you, but as a rational creature speaking the
truth from her heart.”

“You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with an air of awkward
gallantry; “and I am persuaded that, when sanctioned by the express
authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of
being acceptable.”

To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no
reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, that if he
persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering
encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered
in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could
not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XX.

[Illustration]

Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his
successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule
to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the
door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she
entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in
warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collins
received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result
of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the
refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow
from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.

This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet: she would have been
glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage
him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it,
and could not help saying so.

“But depend upon it, Mr. Collins,” she added, “that Lizzy shall be
brought to reason. I will speak to her about it myself directly. She is
a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest; but
I will _make_ her know it.”

“Pardon me for interrupting you, madam,” cried Mr. Collins; “but if she
is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would
altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who
naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If, therefore, she
actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to
force her into accepting me, because, if liable to such defects of
temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity.”

“Sir, you quite misunderstand me,” said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. “Lizzy is
only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as
good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and
we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.”

She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her
husband, called out, as she entered the library,--

“Oh, Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar.
You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will
not have him; and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and
not have _her_.”

Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them
on her face with a calm unconcern, which was not in the least altered by
her communication.

“I have not the pleasure of understanding you,” said he, when she had
finished her speech. “Of what are you talking?”

“Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,
and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy.”

“And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems a hopeless business.”

“Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her
marrying him.”

“Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.”

Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
library.

“Come here, child,” cried her father as she appeared. “I have sent for
you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made
you an offer of marriage. Is it true?”

Elizabeth replied that it was.

“Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?”

“I have, sir.”

“Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your
accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?”

“Yes, or I will never see her again.”

“An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must
be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you
again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again
if you _do_.”

Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning;
but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the
affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.

“What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, by talking in this way? You promised me
to _insist_ upon her marrying him.”

“My dear,” replied her husband, “I have two small favours to request.
First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the
present occasion; and, secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the
library to myself as soon as may be.”

Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did
Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;
coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in
her interest, but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined
interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and
sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner
varied, however, her determination never did.

Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.
He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motive his cousin
could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other
way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her
deserving her mother’s reproach prevented his feeling any regret.

While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend
the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to
her, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you are come, for there is such
fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins has
made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him.”

[Illustration:

     “they entered the breakfast room”
]

Charlotte had hardly time to answer before they were joined by Kitty,
who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the
breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on
the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating
her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of her
family. “Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas,” she added, in a melancholy tone;
“for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me; I am cruelly used,
nobody feels for my poor nerves.”

Charlotte’s reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.

“Ay, there she comes,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “looking as unconcerned as
may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided she
can have her own way. But I tell you what, Miss Lizzy, if you take it
into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,
you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is
to maintain you when your father is dead. _I_ shall not be able to keep
you--and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told
you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again,
and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking
to undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking
to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have
no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it
is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied.”

Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any
attempt to reason with or soothe her would only increase the irritation.
She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them till
they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered with an air more stately
than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls,--

“Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and
let Mr. Collins and me have a little conversation together.”

Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but
Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,
detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after
herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little
curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending
not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet thus began the projected
conversation:--

“Oh, Mr. Collins!”

“My dear madam,” replied he, “let us be for ever silent on this point.
Far be it from me,” he presently continued, in a voice that marked his
displeasure, “to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation to
inevitable evils is the duty of us all: the peculiar duty of a young man
who has been so fortunate as I have been, in early preferment; and, I
trust, I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my
positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I
have often observed, that resignation is never so perfect as when the
blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation.
You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your
family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your
daughter’s favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the
compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf.
My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my
dismission from your daughter’s lips instead of your own; but we are all
liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.
My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due
consideration for the advantage of all your family; and if my _manner_
has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologize.”

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XXI.

[Illustration]

The discussion of Mr. Collins’s offer was now nearly at an end, and
Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily
attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusion of her mother.
As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chiefly expressed, not
by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by
stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to
her; and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of
himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose
civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and
especially to her friend.

The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet’s ill humour or ill
health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth
had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did
not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on
Saturday, and to Saturday he still meant to stay.

After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton, to inquire if Mr. Wickham
were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball.
He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their
aunt’s, where his regret and vexation and the concern of everybody were
well talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged
that the necessity of his absence _had_ been self-imposed.

“I found,” said he, “as the time drew near, that I had better not meet
Mr. Darcy;--that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so
many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes
might arise unpleasant to more than myself.”

She highly approved his forbearance; and they had leisure for a full
discussion of it, and for all the commendations which they civilly
bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with
them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to her.
His accompanying them was a double advantage: she felt all the
compliment it offered to herself; and it was most acceptable as an
occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.

[Illustration: “Walked back with them”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came
from Netherfield, and was opened immediately. The envelope contained a
sheet of elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady’s
fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister’s countenance change as
she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages.
Jane recollected herself soon; and putting the letter away, tried to
join, with her usual cheerfulness, in the general conversation: but
Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her attention
even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave,
than a glance from Jane invited her to follow her upstairs. When they
had gained their own room, Jane, taking out her letter, said, “This is
from Caroline Bingley: what it contains has surprised me a good deal.
The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on their way
to town; and without any intention of coming back again. You shall hear
what she says.”

She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information
of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,
and of their meaning to dine that day in Grosvenor Street, where Mr.
Hurst had a house. The next was in these words:--“‘I do not pretend to
regret anything I shall leave in Hertfordshire except your society, my
dearest friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many
returns of that delightful intercourse we have known, and in the
meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most
unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that.’” To these
high-flown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of
distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she
saw nothing in it really to lament: it was not to be supposed that their
absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley’s being there; and as
to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must soon
cease to regard it in the enjoyment of his.

“It is unlucky,” said she, after a short pause, “that you should not be
able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not
hope that the period of future happiness, to which Miss Bingley looks
forward, may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful
intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater
satisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London by
them.”

“Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into
Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you.

“‘When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which
took him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as we
are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when
Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have
determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend
his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintance are
already there for the winter: I wish I could hear that you, my dearest
friend, had any intention of making one in the crowd, but of that I
despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in
the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux
will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of
whom we shall deprive you.’

“It is evident by this,” added Jane, “that he comes back no more this
winter.”

“It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean he _should_.”

“Why will you think so? It must be his own doing; he is his own master.
But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage which
particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_. ‘Mr. Darcy is
impatient to see his sister; and to confess the truth, _we_ are scarcely
less eager to meet her again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has
her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the affection
she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still
more interesting from the hope we dare to entertain of her being
hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before mentioned to
you my feelings on this subject, but I will not leave the country
without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them
unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have
frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her
relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister’s
partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most
capable of engaging any woman’s heart. With all these circumstances to
favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest
Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness
of so many?’ What think you of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?” said
Jane, as she finished it. “Is it not clear enough? Does it not expressly
declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister;
that she is perfectly convinced of her brother’s indifference; and that
if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him she means (most
kindly!) to put me on my guard. Can there be any other opinion on the
subject?”

“Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?”

“Most willingly.”

“You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is
in love with you and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to
town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he
does not care about you.”

Jane shook her head.

“Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen you
together can doubt his affection; Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot: she
is not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr.
Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the
case is this:--we are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and she
is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion
that when there has been _one_ inter-marriage, she may have less trouble
in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I
dare say it would succeed if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But, my
dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that, because Miss Bingley
tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest
degree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he took leave of you on
Tuesday; or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, instead
of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.”

“If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,” replied Jane, “your
representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know the
foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving
anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is, that she is deceived
herself.”

“That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you
will not take comfort in mine: believe her to be deceived, by all means.
You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.”

“But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in
accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry
elsewhere?”

“You must decide for yourself,” said Elizabeth; “and if, upon mature
deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is
more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you,
by all means, to refuse him.”

“How can you talk so?” said Jane, faintly smiling; “you must know, that,
though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could
not hesitate.”

“I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider
your situation with much compassion.”

“But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be
required. A thousand things may arise in six months.”

The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost
contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline’s
interested wishes; and she could not for a moment suppose that those
wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man
so totally independent of everyone.

She represented to her sister, as forcibly as possible, what she felt on
the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.
Jane’s temper was not desponding; and she was gradually led to hope,
though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that
Bingley would return to Netherfield, and answer every wish of her heart.

They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the
family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman’s conduct;
but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern,
and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen
to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. After
lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation of
thinking that Mr. Bingley would be soon down again, and soon dining at
Longbourn; and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration,
that, though he had been invited only to a family dinner, she would take
care to have two full courses.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XXII.

[Illustration]

The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases; and again, during the
chief of the day, was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins.
Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. “It keeps him in good
humour,” said she, “and I am more obliged to you than I can express.”

Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and
that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was
very amiable; but Charlotte’s kindness extended farther than Elizabeth
had any conception of:--its object was nothing less than to secure her
from any return of Mr. Collins’s addresses, by engaging them towards
herself. Such was Miss Lucas’s scheme; and appearances were so
favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost
sure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very soon.
But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his
character; for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the next
morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw
himself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins,
from a conviction that, if they saw him depart, they could not fail to
conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known
till its success could be known likewise; for, though feeling almost
secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,
he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday. His
reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas
perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and
instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had
she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.

In as short a time as Mr. Collins’s long speeches would allow,
everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as
they entered the house, he earnestly entreated her to name the day that
was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must
be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with
his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must
guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its
continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and
disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that
establishment were gained.

Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;
and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins’s present
circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom
they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were
exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more
interest than the matter had ever

[Illustration:

     “So much love and eloquence”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

excited before, how many years longer Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and
Sir William gave it as his decided opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins
should be in possession of the Longbourn estate, it would be highly
expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at St.
James’s. The whole family in short were properly overjoyed on the
occasion. The younger girls formed hopes of _coming out_ a year or two
sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved
from their apprehension of Charlotte’s dying an old maid. Charlotte
herself was tolerably composed. She had gained her point, and had time
to consider of it. Her reflections were in general satisfactory. Mr.
Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable: his society was
irksome, and his attachment to her must be imaginary. But still he would
be her husband. Without thinking highly either of men or of matrimony,
marriage had always been her object: it was the only honourable
provision for well-educated young women of small fortune, and, however
uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative
from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of
twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all the good
luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the
surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she
valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and
probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be
shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved
to give her the information herself; and therefore charged Mr. Collins,
when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had
passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very
dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the
curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct
questions on his return, as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was
at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to
publish his prosperous love.

As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of
the family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies
moved for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and
cordiality, said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again,
whenever his other engagements might allow him to visit them.

“My dear madam,” he replied, “this invitation is particularly
gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you
may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as
possible.”

They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for
so speedy a return, immediately said,--

“But is there not danger of Lady Catherine’s disapprobation here, my
good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of
offending your patroness.”

“My dear sir,” replied Mr. Collins, “I am particularly obliged to you
for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so
material a step without her Ladyship’s concurrence.”

“You cannot be too much on your guard. Risk anything rather than her
displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us
again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home,
and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence.”

“Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such
affectionate attention; and, depend upon it, you will speedily receive
from me a letter of thanks for this as well as for every other mark of
your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins,
though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall
now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting
my cousin Elizabeth.”

With proper civilities, the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally
surprised to find that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished
to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of
her younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him.
She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others: there was a
solidity in his reflections which often struck her; and though by no
means so clever as herself, she thought that, if encouraged to read and
improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very
agreeable companion. But on the following morning every hope of this
kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a
private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.

The possibility of Mr. Collins’s fancying himself in love with her
friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two: but
that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility
as that she could encourage him herself; and her astonishment was
consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and
she could not help crying out,--

“Engaged to Mr. Collins! my dear Charlotte, impossible!”

The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her
story gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a
reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained
her composure, and calmly replied,--

“Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incredible
that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman’s good opinion,
because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?”

But Elizabeth had now recollected herself; and, making a strong effort
for it, was able to assure her, with tolerable firmness, that the
prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she
wished her all imaginable happiness.

“I see what you are feeling,” replied Charlotte; “you must be surprised,
very much surprised, so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marry you.
But when you have had time to think it all over, I hope you will be
satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know. I never
was. I ask only a comfortable home; and, considering Mr. Collins’s
character, connections, and situation in life, I am convinced that my
chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on
entering the marriage state.”

Elizabeth quietly answered “undoubtedly;” and, after an awkward pause,
they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much
longer; and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard. It
was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so
unsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr. Collins’s making two offers
of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now
accepted. She had always felt that Charlotte’s opinion of matrimony was
not exactly like her own; but she could not have supposed it possible
that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better
feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte, the wife of Mr. Collins, was a
most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing
herself, and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction
that it was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot
she had chosen.

[Illustration:

     “Protested he must be entirely mistaken.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER XXIII.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what
she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorized to mention it,
when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter to
announce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them,
and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the
houses, he unfolded the matter,--to an audience not merely wondering,
but incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than
politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always
unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed,--

“Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know
that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?”

Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
without anger such treatment: but Sir William’s good-breeding carried
him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the
truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the
most forbearing courtesy.

Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant
a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by
mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and
endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters,
by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she
was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the
happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character
of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.

Mrs. Bennet was, in fact, too much overpowered to say a great deal while
Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings
found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving
the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collins
had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be happy
together; and, fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Two
inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that
Elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief; and the other, that
she herself had been barbarously used by them all; and on these two
points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could
console and nothing appease her. Nor did that day wear out her
resentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without
scolding her: a month passed away before she could speak to Sir William
or Lady Lucas without being rude; and many months were gone before she
could at all forgive their daughter.

Mr. Bennet’s emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such
as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for
it gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had
been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and
more foolish than his daughter!

Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match: but she said
less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness;
nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty and
Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a
clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news
to spread at Meryton.

Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on
Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she
called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was,
though Mrs. Bennet’s sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been
enough to drive happiness away.

Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them
mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that no
real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Her
disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her
sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could
never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as
Bingley had now been gone a week, and nothing was heard of his return.

Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting
the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised
letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their
father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a
twelve-month’s abode in the family might have prompted. After
discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them,
with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the
affection of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained
that it was merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had
been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at
Longbourn, whither he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight;
for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that
she wished it to take place as soon as possible, which he trusted would
be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early
day for making him the happiest of men.

Mr. Collins’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of
pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to
complain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should come
to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient
and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house
while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the
most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and they
gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley’s continued
absence.

Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after
day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the
report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to
Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs.
Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous
falsehood.

Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but that
his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as she
was to admit an idea so destructive to Jane’s happiness, and so
dishonourable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its
frequently recurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters,
and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss
Darcy and the amusements of London, might be too much, she feared, for
the strength of his attachment.

As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more
painful than Elizabeth’s: but whatever she felt she was desirous of
concealing; and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject
was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother, an
hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her
impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he
did not come back she should think herself very ill-used. It needed all
Jane’s steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable
tranquillity.

Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight, but his
reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his
first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention;
and, luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them
from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by
him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time
to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.

[Illustration:

     “_Whenever she spoke in a low voice_”
]

Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of
anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour, and
wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of
Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she
regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see
them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and
whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that
they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself
and her daughters out of the house as soon as Mr. Bennet was dead. She
complained bitterly of all this to her husband.

“Indeed, Mr. Bennet,” said she, “it is very hard to think that Charlotte
Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that _I_ should be forced
to make way for _her_, and live to see her take my place in it!”

“My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for
better things. Let us flatter ourselves that _I_ may be the survivor.”

This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet; and, therefore, instead of
making any answer, she went on as before.

“I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it was
not for the entail, I should not mind it.”

“What should not you mind?”

“I should not mind anything at all.”

“Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such
insensibility.”

“I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How
anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one’s own
daughters I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins, too!
Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?”

“I leave it to yourself to determine,” said Mr. Bennet.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XXIV.

[Illustration]

Miss Bingley’s letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first
sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for
the winter, and concluded with her brother’s regret at not having had
time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left
the country.

Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of
the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the
writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy’s praise occupied
the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on; and Caroline
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict
the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former
letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother’s being an
inmate of Mr. Darcy’s house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of
the latter with regard to new furniture.

Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this,
heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern
for her sister and resentment against all others. To Caroline’s
assertion of her brother’s being partial to Miss Darcy, she paid no
credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she
had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she
could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness
of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave
of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice his own happiness to
the caprice of their inclinations. Had his own happiness, however, been
the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in
whatever manner he thought best; but her sister’s was involved in it, as
she thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short, on
which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She
could think of nothing else; and yet, whether Bingley’s regard had
really died away, or were suppressed by his friends’ interference;
whether he had been aware of Jane’s attachment, or whether it had
escaped his observation; whichever were the case, though her opinion of
him must be materially affected by the difference, her sister’s
situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded.

A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to
Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet’s leaving them together, after a
longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could
not help saying,--

“O that my dear mother had more command over herself! she can have no
idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But I
will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall
all be as we were before.”

Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said
nothing.

“You doubt me,” cried Jane, slightly colouring; “indeed, you have no
reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my
acquaintance but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and
nothing to reproach him with. Thank God I have not _that_ pain. A little
time, therefore--I shall certainly try to get the better----”

With a stronger voice she soon added, “I have this comfort immediately,
that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it
has done no harm to anyone but myself.”

“My dear Jane,” exclaimed Elizabeth, “you are too good. Your sweetness
and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to
you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you
deserve.”

Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back
the praise on her sister’s warm affection.

“Nay,” said Elizabeth, “this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all the
world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. _I_ only want
to think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not be
afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your
privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few people
whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see
of the world the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms
my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the
little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of either merit
or sense. I have met with two instances lately: one I will not mention,
the other is Charlotte’s marriage. It is unaccountable! in every view it
is unaccountable!”

“My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will
ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference of
situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins’s respectability, and
Charlotte’s prudent, steady character. Remember that she is one of a
large family; that as to fortune it is a most eligible match; and be
ready to believe, for everybody’s sake, that she may feel something like
regard and esteem for our cousin.”

“To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else
could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that
Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her
understanding than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a
conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man: you know he is, as well as
I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who marries him
cannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though
it is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual,
change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade
yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of
danger security for happiness.”

“I must think your language too strong in speaking of both,” replied
Jane; “and I hope you will be convinced of it, by seeing them happy
together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You
mentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat
you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, and
saying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancy
ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young man
to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but
our own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than
it does.”

“And men take care that they should.”

“If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea
of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.”

“I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley’s conduct to design,”
said Elizabeth; “but, without scheming to do wrong, or to make others
unhappy, there may be error and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness,
want of attention to other people’s feelings, and want of resolution,
will do the business.”

“And do you impute it to either of those?”

“Yes; to the last. But if I go on I shall displease you by saying what I
think of persons you esteem. Stop me, whilst you can.”

“You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?”

“Yes, in conjunction with his friend.”

“I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can
only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me no other woman can
secure it.”

“Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his
happiness: they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they
may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great
connections, and pride.”

“Beyond a doubt they do wish him to choose Miss Darcy,” replied Jane;
“but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have
known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love
her better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely
they should have opposed their brother’s. What sister would think
herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very
objectionable? If they believed him attached to me they would not try to
part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such an
affection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most
unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been
mistaken--or, at least, it is slight, it is nothing in comparison of
what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it
in the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.”

Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley’s
name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.

Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no
more; and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account
for it clearly, there seemed little chance of her ever considering it
with less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what
she did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely
the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw
her no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at
the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet’s best
comfort was, that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.

Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. “So, Lizzy,” said he, one
day, “your sister is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next
to being married, a girl likes to be crossed in love a little now and
then. It is something to think of, and gives her a sort of distinction
among her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to
be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough at
Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham
be your man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.”

“Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not
all expect Jane’s good fortune.”

“True,” said Mr. Bennet; “but it is a comfort to think that, whatever of
that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will
always make the most of it.”

Mr. Wickham’s society was of material service in dispelling the gloom
which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn
family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now
added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already
heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him,
was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was
pleased to think how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they
had known anything of the matter.

Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any
extenuating circumstances in the case unknown to the society of
Hertfordshire: her mild and steady candour always pleaded for
allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes; but by everybody else
Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XXV.

[Illustration]

After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, Mr.
Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of
Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his
side by preparations for the reception of his bride, as he had reason to
hope, that shortly after his next return into Hertfordshire, the day
would be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave
of his relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished
his fair cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father
another letter of thanks.

On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her
brother and his wife, who came, as usual, to spend the Christmas at
Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly
superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield
ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by
trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so
well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger
than Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Philips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
woman, and a great favourite with her Longbourn nieces. Between the two
eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a very particular regard.
They had frequently been staying with her in town.

The first part of Mrs. Gardiner’s business, on her arrival, was to
distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was
done, she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen.
Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They
had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her
girls had been on the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing
in it.

“I do not blame Jane,” she continued, “for Jane would have got Mr.
Bingley if she could. But, Lizzy! Oh, sister! it is very hard to think
that she might have been Mr. Collins’s wife by this time, had not it
been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room,
and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have
a daughter married before I have, and that Longbourn estate is just as
much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people, indeed,
sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of
them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted
so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the
greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us of
long sleeves.”

Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in
the course of Jane and Elizabeth’s correspondence with her, made her
sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the
conversation.

When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject.
“It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane,” said she. “I
am sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man,
such as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty
girl for a few weeks, and, when accident separates them, so easily
forgets her, that these sort of inconstancies are very frequent.”

[Illustration:

     “Offended two or three young ladies”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“An excellent consolation in its way,” said Elizabeth; “but it will not
do for _us_. We do not suffer by accident. It does not often happen
that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of
independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in
love with only a few days before.”

“But that expression of ‘violently in love’ is so hackneyed, so
doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as
often applied to feelings which arise only from a half hour’s
acquaintance, as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent was_
Mr. Bingley’s love?”

“I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite
inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time
they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he
offended two or three young ladies by not asking them to dance; and I
spoke to him twice myself without receiving an answer. Could there be
finer symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?”

“Oh, yes! of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Poor
Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get
over it immediately. It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; you
would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she would
be prevailed on to go back with us? Change of scene might be of
service--and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as
anything.”

Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded
of her sister’s ready acquiescence.

“I hope,” added Mrs. Gardiner, “that no consideration with regard to
this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of
town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go
out so little, that it is very improbable they should meet at all,
unless he really comes to see her.”

“And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his
friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a
part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may,
perhaps, have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he
would hardly think a month’s ablution enough to cleanse him from its
impurities, were he once to enter it; and, depend upon it, Mr. Bingley
never stirs without him.”

“So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane
correspond with his sister? _She_ will not be able to help calling.”

“She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”

But, in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this
point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley’s being
withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which
convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely
hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that
his affection might be re-animated, and the influence of his friends
successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane’s
attractions.

Miss Bennet accepted her aunt’s invitation with pleasure; and the
Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time than as she
hoped, by Caroline’s not living in the same house with her brother, she
might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of
seeing him.

The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Philipses,
the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its
engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment
of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family
dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always
made part of it, of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and
on these occasions Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth’s
warm commendation of him, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing
them, from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference
of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and she
resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left
Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such
an attachment.

To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,
unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago,
before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very part
of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many
acquaintance in common; and, though Wickham had been little there since
the death of Darcy’s father, five years before, it was yet in his power
to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had been
in the way of procuring.

Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by
character perfectly well. Here, consequently, was an inexhaustible
subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with
the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her
tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was
delighting both him and herself. On being made acquainted with the
present Mr. Darcy’s treatment of him, she tried to remember something of
that gentleman’s reputed disposition, when quite a lad, which might
agree with it; and was confident, at last, that she recollected having
heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud,
ill-natured boy.

[Illustration:

     “Will you come and see me?”
]

CHAPTER XXVI.

[Illustration]

Mrs. Gardiner’s caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on
the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone: after
honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:--

“You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you
are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking
openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involve
yourself, or endeavour to involve him, in an affection which the want of
fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against
_him_: he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he
ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is--you
must not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all
expect you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and
good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father.”

“My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.”

“Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.”

“Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of
myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if I
can prevent it.”

“Elizabeth, you are not serious now.”

“I beg your pardon. I will try again. At present I am not in love with
Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison,
the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached to
me--I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence
of it. Oh, _that_ abominable Mr. Darcy! My father’s opinion of me does
me the greatest honour; and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My
father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I
should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but
since we see, every day, that where there is affection young people are
seldom withheld, by immediate want of fortune, from entering into
engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many
of my fellow-creatures, if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that
it would be wiser to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is
not to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his
first object. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In
short, I will do my best.”

“Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very
often. At least you should not _remind_ your mother of inviting him.”

“As I did the other day,” said Elizabeth, with a conscious smile; “very
true, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. But do not imagine
that he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has been
so frequently invited this week. You know my mother’s ideas as to the
necessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon my
honour, I will try to do what I think to be wisest; and now I hope you
are satisfied.”

Her aunt assured her that she was; and Elizabeth, having thanked her for
the kindness of her hints, they parted,--a wonderful instance of advice
being given on such a point without being resented.

Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted
by the Gardiners and Jane; but, as he took up his abode with the
Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His
marriage was now fast approaching; and she was at length so far resigned
as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured
tone, that she “_wished_ they might be happy.” Thursday was to be the
wedding-day, and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and
when she rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother’s
ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself,
accompanied her out of the room. As they went down stairs together,
Charlotte said,--

“I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.”

“_That_ you certainly shall.”

“And I have another favour to ask. Will you come and see me?”

“We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire.”

“I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, to
come to Hunsford.”

Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the
visit.

“My father and Maria are to come to me in March,” added Charlotte, “and
I hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be
as welcome to me as either of them.”

The wedding took place: the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from
the church door, and everybody had as much to say or to hear on the
subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend, and their
correspondence was as regular and frequent as it ever had been: that it
should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never
address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over;
and, though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the
sake of what had been rather than what was. Charlotte’s first letters
were received with a good deal of eagerness: there could not but be
curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would
like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to
be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte
expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. She
wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing
which she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and
roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine’s behaviour was most
friendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins’s picture of Hunsford and
Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait
for her own visit there, to know the rest.

Jane had already written a few lines to her sister, to announce their
safe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it
would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.

Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience
generally is. Jane had been a week in town, without either seeing or
hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing that
her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident been
lost.

“My aunt,” she continued, “is going to-morrow into that part of the
town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street.”

She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley.
“I did not think Caroline in spirits,” were her words, “but she was very
glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming
to London. I was right, therefore; my last letter had never reached her.
I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much
engaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that
Miss Darcy was expected to dinner: I wish I could see her. My visit was
not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall
soon see them here.”

Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It convinced her that
accident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister’s being in town.

Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to
persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be
blind to Miss Bingley’s inattention. After waiting at home every morning
for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the
visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and, yet
more, the alteration of her manner, would allow Jane to deceive herself
no longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister
will prove what she felt:--

     “My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in
     her better judgment, at my expense, when I confess myself to have
     been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley’s regard for me. But, my
     dear sister, though the event has proved you right, do not think me
     obstinate if I still assert that, considering what her behaviour
     was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. I do not at
     all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me; but,
     if the same circumstances were to happen again, I am sure I should
     be deceived again. Caroline did not return my visit till yesterday;
     and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the meantime. When she
     did come, it was very evident that she had no pleasure in it; she
     made a slight, formal apology for not calling before, said not a
     word of wishing to see me again, and was, in every respect, so
     altered a creature, that when she went away I was perfectly
     resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity, though I
     cannot help blaming, her. She was very wrong in singling me out as
     she did; I can safely say, that every advance to intimacy began on
     her side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been
     acting wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her
     brother is the cause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and
     though _we_ know this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she
     feels it, it will easily account for her behaviour to me; and so
     deservedly dear as he is to his sister, whatever anxiety she may
     feel on his behalf is natural and amiable. I cannot but wonder,
     however, at her having any such fears now, because if he had at all
     cared about me, we must have met long, long ago. He knows of my
     being in town, I am certain, from something she said herself; and
     yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she wanted to
     persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. I cannot
     understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should be
     almost tempted to say, that there is a strong appearance of
     duplicity in all this. I will endeavour to banish every painful
     thought, and think only of what will make me happy, your affection,
     and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear
     from you very soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never
     returning to Netherfield again, of giving up the house, but not
     with any certainty. We had better not mention it. I am extremely
     glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at
     Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and Maria. I am
     sure you will be very comfortable there.

“Yours, etc.”

This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned, as she
considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.
All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not
even wish for any renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on every
review of it; and, as a punishment for him, as well as a possible
advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr.
Darcy’s sister, as, by Wickham’s account, she would make him abundantly
regret what he had thrown away.

Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise
concerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabeth had
such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to
herself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over,
he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough to
see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain.
Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied
with believing that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortune
permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most
remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself
agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than
in Charlotte’s, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence.
Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and, while able to
suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was
ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very
sincerely wish him happy.

All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and, after relating the
circumstances, she thus went on:--“I am now convinced, my dear aunt,
that I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that
pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name,
and wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordial
towards _him_, they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find
out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think
her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. My
watchfulness has been effectual; and though I should certainly be a more
interesting object to all my acquaintance, were I distractedly in love
with him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance.
Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take
his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the ways
of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that
handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the
plain.”

[Illustration:

     “On the Stairs”
]

CHAPTER XXVII.

[Illustration]

With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise
diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and
sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take
Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of
going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the
plan, and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater
pleasure as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire
of seeing Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins.
There was novelty in the scheme; and as, with such a mother and such
uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change
was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would, moreover, give
her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have
been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly,
and was finally settled according to Charlotte’s first sketch. She was
to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement of
spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became as
perfect as plan could be.

The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her,
and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he
told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.

The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on
his side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget that
Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the
first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner
of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of what
she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their
opinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, there
was a solicitude, an interest, which she felt must ever attach her to
him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced, that,
whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable
and pleasing.

Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think
him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a
good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say
that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much
delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but
she had known Sir William’s too long. He could tell her nothing new of
the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were
worn out, like his information.

It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early
as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner’s
door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival: when
they entered the passage, she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,
looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and
lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,
whose eagerness for their cousin’s appearance would not allow them to
wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her
for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and
kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and
shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.

Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first subject was her
sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to
her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her
spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however, to
hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the
particulars also of Miss Bingley’s visit in Gracechurch Street, and
repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the
acquaintance.

Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham’s desertion, and
complimented her on bearing it so well.

“But, my dear Elizabeth,” she added, “what sort of girl is Miss King? I
should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.”

“Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,
between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end,
and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,
because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a
girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is
mercenary.”

“If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know
what to think.”

“She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her.”

“But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather’s death
made her mistress of this fortune?”

“No--why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_
affections, because I had no money, what occasion could there be for
making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally
poor?”

“But there seems indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her so
soon after this event.”

“A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant
decorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does not object to it,
why should _we_?”

“_Her_ not objecting does not justify _him_. It only shows her being
deficient in something herself--sense or feeling.”

“Well,” cried Elizabeth, “have it as you choose. _He_ shall be
mercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish.”

“No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry, you know,
to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire.”

“Oh, if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in
Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not
much better. I am sick of them all. Thank heaven! I am going to-morrow
where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has
neither manners nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones
worth knowing, after all.”

“Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.”

Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the
unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in
a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.

“We have not quite determined how far it shall carry us,” said Mrs.
Gardiner; “but perhaps, to the Lakes.”

No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her
acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. “My dear, dear
aunt,” she rapturously cried, “what delight! what felicity! You give me
fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What are men
to rocks and mountains? Oh, what hours of transport we shall spend! And
when we _do_ return, it shall not be like other travellers, without
being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We _will_ know where
we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen. Lakes, mountains,
and rivers, shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor, when
we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarrelling
about its relative situation. Let _our_ first effusions be less
insupportable than those of the generality of travellers.”

[Illustration:

     “At the door”
]

CHAPTER XXVIII.

[Illustration]

Every object in the next day’s journey was new and interesting to
Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had
seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health,
and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.

When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in
search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.
The paling of Rosings park was their boundary on one side. Elizabeth
smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.

At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to the
road, the house standing in it, the green pales and the laurel hedge,
everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte
appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate, which
led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of
the whole party. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing
at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the
liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with
coming, when she found herself so affectionately received. She saw
instantly that her cousin’s manners were not altered by his marriage:
his formal civility was just what it had been; and he detained her some
minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her
family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the
neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they were
in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious
formality, to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife’s
offers of refreshment.

Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help
fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect,
and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her, as if
wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But though
everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him
by any sigh of repentance; and rather looked with wonder at her friend,
that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. When Mr.
Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed,
which certainly was not seldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on
Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general
Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough to admire
every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the
fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had
happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the
garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of
which he attended himself. To work in his garden was one of his most
respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance
with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and
owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the way
through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an
interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out
with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number the
fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in
the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which
the country or the kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with
the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that
bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a
handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.

From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows;
but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white
frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte
took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,
probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband’s
help. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything
was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency, of which
Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could be
forgotten, there was really a great air of comfort throughout, and by
Charlotte’s evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be often
forgotten.

She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It
was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining
in, observed,--

“Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine
de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will
be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I
doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when
service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying that she will
include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which she
honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is
charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to
walk home. Her Ladyship’s carriage is regularly ordered for us. I
_should_ say, one of her Ladyship’s carriages, for she has several.”

“Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman, indeed,” added
Charlotte, “and a most attentive neighbour.”

“Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of
woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.”

The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news, and
telling again what had been already written; and when it closed,
Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon
Charlotte’s degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding,
and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it
was all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visit would
pass, the quiet tenour of their usual employments, the vexatious
interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse
with Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all.

About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready
for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in
confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running
upstairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened
the door, and met Maria in the landing-place, who, breathless with
agitation, cried out,--

[Illustration:

     “In Conversation with the ladies”

[Copyright 1894 by George Allen.]]

“Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for
there is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make
haste, and come down this moment.”

Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more;
and down they ran into the dining-room which fronted the lane, in quest
of this wonder; it was two ladies, stopping in a low phaeton at the
garden gate.

“And is this all?” cried Elizabeth. “I expected at least that the pigs
were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her
daughter!”

“La! my dear,” said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, “it is not Lady
Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them. The
other is Miss De Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little
creature. Who would have thought she could be so thin and small!”

“She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind.
Why does she not come in?”

“Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favours
when Miss De Bourgh comes in.”

“I like her appearance,” said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. “She
looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She will
make him a very proper wife.”

Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation
with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth’s high diversion, was
stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness
before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss De Bourgh looked that
way.

At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and
the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two
girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which
Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked
to dine at Rosings the next day.

[Illustration:

     ‘Lady Catherine, said she, you have given me a treasure.’

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER XXIX.

[Illustration]

Mr. Collins’s triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete.
The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering
visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his
wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of
doing it should be given so soon was such an instance of Lady
Catherine’s condescension as he knew not how to admire enough.

“I confess,” said he, “that I should not have been at all surprised by
her Ladyship’s asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening
at Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that
it would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this?
Who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine
there (an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so
immediately after your arrival?”

“I am the less surprised at what has happened,” replied Sir William,
“from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which
my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such
instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.”

Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their
visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what
they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and
so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them.

When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to
Elizabeth,--

“Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady
Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which
becomes herself and daughter. I would advise you merely to put on
whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest--there is no occasion
for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for
being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rank
preserved.”

While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different
doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much
objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts of
her Ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas,
who had been little used to company; and she looked forward to her
introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done
to his presentation at St. James’s.

As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile
across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and
Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such
raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but
slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the
house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally
cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.

When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria’s alarm was every moment
increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm.
Elizabeth’s courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady
Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or
miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money and rank she
thought she could witness without trepidation.

From the entrance hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a
rapturous air, the fine proportion and finished ornaments, they followed
the servants through an antechamber to the room where Lady Catherine,
her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her Ladyship, with great
condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had settled it
with her husband that the office of introduction should be hers, it was
performed in a proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks
which he would have thought necessary.

In spite of having been at St. James’s, Sir William was so completely
awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage
enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word;
and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge
of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself
quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her
composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked
features, which might once have been handsome. Her air was not
conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her
visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by
silence: but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone as
marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to
Elizabeth’s mind; and, from the observation of the day altogether, she
believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had represented.

When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment
she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the
daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria’s astonishment at her
being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any
likeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly: her
features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very
little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance
there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening
to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before
her eyes.

After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to
admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties,
and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth
looking at in the summer.

The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants,
and all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he
had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by
her Ladyship’s desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish
nothing greater. He carved and ate and praised with delighted alacrity;
and every dish was commended first by him, and then by Sir William, who
was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law said, in a
manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear. But Lady
Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most
gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty
to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth was ready
to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between
Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in
listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all
the dinnertime. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how
little Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish and
fearing she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question,
and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.

When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be
done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any
intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every
subject in so decisive a manner as proved that she was not used to have
her judgment controverted. She inquired into Charlotte’s domestic
concerns familiarly and minutely, and gave her a great deal of advice as
to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be
regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the
care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was
beneath this great lady’s attention which could furnish her with an
occasion for dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse with
Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and
Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew
the least, and who, she observed to Mrs. Collins, was a very genteel,
pretty kind of girl. She asked her at different times how many sisters
she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of
them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they
had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been her
mother’s maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her
questions, but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine then
observed,--

“Your father’s estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think? For your
sake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no
occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thought
necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh’s family. Do you play and sing, Miss
Bennet?”

“A little.”

“Oh then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our
instrument is a capital one, probably superior to ---- you shall try it
some day. Do your sisters play and sing?”

“One of them does.”

“Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The Miss
Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do
you draw?”

“No, not at all.”

“What, none of you?”

“Not one.”

“That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mother
should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.”

“My mother would have no objection, but my father hates London.”

“Has your governess left you?”

“We never had any governess.”

“No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at home
without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother must
have been quite a slave to your education.”

Elizabeth could hardly help smiling, as she assured her that had not
been the case.

“Then who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess, you must
have been neglected.”

“Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as
wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged to
read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be
idle certainly might.”

“Ay, no doubt: but that is what a governess will prevent; and if I had
known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage
one. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady
and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is
wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that
way. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces
of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and
it was but the other day that I recommended another young person, who
was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite
delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalfe’s
calling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. ‘Lady
Catherine,’ said she, ‘you have given me a treasure.’ Are any of your
younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?”

“Yes, ma’am, all.”

“All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The
younger ones out before the elder are married! Your younger sisters must
be very young?”

“Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps _she_ is full young to be much
in company. But really, ma’am, I think it would be very hard upon
younger sisters that they should not have their share of society and
amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to
marry early. The last born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth
as the first. And to be kept back on _such_ a motive! I think it would
not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.”

“Upon my word,” said her Ladyship, “you give your opinion very decidedly
for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?”

“With three younger sisters grown up,” replied Elizabeth, smiling, “your
Ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.”

Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer;
and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever
dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.

“You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure,--therefore you need not
conceal your age.”

“I am not one-and-twenty.”

When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card tables
were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat
down to quadrille; and as Miss De Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the
two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her
party. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was
uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson
expressed her fears of Miss De Bourgh’s being too hot or too cold, or
having too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the
other table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakes
of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins
was employed in agreeing to everything her Ladyship said, thanking her
for every fish he won, and apologizing if he thought he won too many.
Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotes
and noble names.

When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,
the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins,
gratefully accepted, and immediately ordered. The party then gathered
round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were
to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by the
arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.
Collins’s side, and as many bows on Sir William’s, they departed. As
soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her
cousin to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which,
for Charlotte’s sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But
her commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means
satisfy Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her Ladyship’s
praise into his own hands.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XXX.

[Illustration]

Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford; but his visit was long
enough to convince him of his daughter’s being most comfortably settled,
and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not
often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his
mornings to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country: but
when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments,
and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her
cousin by the alteration; for the chief of the time between breakfast
and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden, or in
reading and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room,
which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.
Elizabeth at first had rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer
the dining parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a
pleasanter aspect: but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent
reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been
much less in his own apartment had they sat in one equally lively; and
she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.

From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and
were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went
along, and how often especially Miss De Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,
which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened
almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had
a few minutes’ conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever
prevailed on to get out.

Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and
not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise;
and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings
to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many
hours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her Ladyship,
and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during
these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work,
and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement
of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she
accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding
out that Mrs. Collins’s joints of meat were too large for her family.

Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in the
commission of the peace for the county, she was a most active magistrate
in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by
Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be
quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the
village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold
them into harmony and plenty.

[Illustration:

     “he never failed to inform them”
]

The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week;
and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one
card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart
of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living
of the neighbourhood in general was beyond the Collinses’ reach. This,
however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time
comfortably enough: there were half hours of pleasant conversation with
Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year, that she
had often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where
she frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was
along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was
a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and
where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine’s curiosity.

In this quiet way the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.
Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an
addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be
important. Elizabeth had heard, soon after her arrival, that Mr. Darcy
was expected there in the course of a few weeks; and though there were
not many of her acquaintance whom she did not prefer, his coming would
furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and
she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley’s designs on him
were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined
by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest
satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and
seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by
Miss Lucas and herself.

His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walking
the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,
in order to have

[Illustration:

“The gentlemen accompanied him.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

the earliest assurance of it; and, after making his bow as the carriage
turned into the park, hurried home with the great intelligence. On the
following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were
two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. Darcy had brought
with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle, Lord ----;
and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins returned,
the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen them from her
husband’s room, crossing the road, and immediately running into the
other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding,--

“I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would
never have come so soon to wait upon me.”

Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment
before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly
afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam,
who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and
address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been
used to look in Hertfordshire, paid his compliments, with his usual
reserve, to Mrs. Collins; and whatever might be his feelings towards her
friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely
courtesied to him, without saying a word.

Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly, with the
readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but
his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and
garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody.
At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of
Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual
way; and, after a moment’s pause, added,--

“My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never
happened to see her there?”

She was perfectly sensible that he never had: but she wished to see
whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the
Bingleys and Jane; and she thought he looked a little confused as he
answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The
subject was pursued no further, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went
away.

[Illustration:

“At Church”
]

CHAPTER XXXI.

[Illustration]

Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners were very much admired at the Parsonage,
and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasure of
their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they
received any invitation thither, for while there were visitors in the
house they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,
almost a week after the gentlemen’s arrival, that they were honoured by
such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little
of either Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called
at the Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had
only seen at church.

The invitation was accepted, of course, and at a proper hour they joined
the party in Lady Catherine’s drawing-room. Her Ladyship received them
civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so
acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact,
almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,
much more than to any other person in the room.

Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them: anything was a
welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins’s pretty friend had,
moreover, caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and
talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying
at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so
well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much
spirit and flow as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as
well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned
towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her Ladyship, after a
while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not
scruple to call out,--

“What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking
of? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is.”

“We were talking of music, madam,” said he, when no longer able to avoid
a reply.

“Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I
must have my share in the conversation, if you are speaking of music.
There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true
enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever
learnt, I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her
health had allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have
performed delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?”

Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister’s proficiency.

“I am very glad to hear such a good account of her,” said Lady
Catherine; “and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel,
if she does not practise a great deal.”

“I assure you, madam,” he replied, “that she does not need such advice.
She practises very constantly.”

“So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write
to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often
tell young ladies, that no excellence in music is to be acquired without
constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she will
never play really well, unless she practises more; and though Mrs.
Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told
her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs.
Jenkinson’s room. She would be in nobody’s way, you know, in that part
of the house.”

Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt’s ill-breeding, and made
no answer.

When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having
promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He
drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then
talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away from
her, and moving with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte,
stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer’s
countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first
convenient pause turned to him with an arch smile, and said,--

“You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear
me. But I will not be alarmed, though your sister _does_ play so well.
There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at
the will of others. My courage always rises with every attempt to
intimidate me.”

“I shall not say that you are mistaken,” he replied, “because you could
not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I
have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know, that you
find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which, in fact,
are not your own.”

Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to
Colonel Fitzwilliam, “Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of
me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky
in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character, in a
part of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree
of credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention
all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me
leave to say, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate,
and such things may come out as will shock your relations to hear.”

“I am not afraid of you,” said he, smilingly.

“Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,” cried Colonel
Fitzwilliam. “I should like to know how he behaves among strangers.”

“You shall hear, then--but prepare for something very dreadful. The
first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know, was at
a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced only four
dances! I am sorry to pain you, but so it was. He danced only four
dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more
than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner. Mr. Darcy,
you cannot deny the fact.”

“I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly
beyond my own party.”

“True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, Colonel
Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders.”

“Perhaps,” said Darcy, “I should have judged better had I sought an
introduction, but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers.”

“Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?” said Elizabeth, still
addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. “Shall we ask him why a man of sense and
education, and who has lived in the world, is ill-qualified to recommend
himself to strangers?”

“I can answer your question,” said Fitzwilliam, “without applying to
him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.”

“I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,” said Darcy,
“of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot
catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their
concerns, as I often see done.”

“My fingers,” said Elizabeth, “do not move over this instrument in the
masterly manner which I see so many women’s do. They have not the same
force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I
have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I would not take
the trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers
as capable as any other woman’s of superior execution.”

Darcy smiled and said, “You are perfectly right. You have employed your
time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can
think anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers.”

Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know
what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again.
Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
to Darcy,--

“Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and
could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion
of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne’s. Anne would have
been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.”

Elizabeth looked at Darcy, to see how cordially he assented to his
cousin’s praise: but neither at that moment nor at any other could she
discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss
De Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have
been just as likely to marry _her_, had she been his relation.

Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth’s performance, mixing
with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received
them with all the forbearance of civility; and at the request of the
gentlemen remained at the instrument till her Ladyship’s carriage was
ready to take them all home.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XXXII.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane,
while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,
when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a
visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to be
Lady Catherine; and under that apprehension was putting away her
half-finished letter, that she might escape all impertinent questions,
when the door opened, and to her very great surprise Mr. Darcy, and Mr.
Darcy only, entered the room.

He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologized for his
intrusion, by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies to
be within.

They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made,
seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely
necessary, therefore, to think of something; and in this emergency
recollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling
curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty
departure, she observed,--

“How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy!
It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you
all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day
before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?”

“Perfectly so, I thank you.”

She found that she was to receive no other answer; and, after a short
pause, added,--

“I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever
returning to Netherfield again?”

“I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend
very little of his time there in future. He has many friends, and he is
at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually
increasing.”

“If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for the
neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we
might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did
not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as
for his own, and we must expect him to keep or quit it on the same
principle.”

“I should not be surprised,” said Darcy, “if he were to give it up as
soon as any eligible purchase offers.”

Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his
friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the
trouble of finding a subject to him.

He took the hint and soon began with, “This seems a very comfortable
house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr.
Collins first came to Hunsford.”

“I believe she did--and I am sure she could not have bestowed her
kindness on a more grateful object.”

“Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife.”

“Yes, indeed; his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of
the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made
him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--though
I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest
thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however; and, in a
prudential light, it is certainly a very good match for her.”

“It must be very agreeable to her to be settled within so easy a
distance of her own family and friends.”

“An easy distance do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles.”

“And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day’s
journey. Yes, I call it a very easy distance.”

“I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_
of the match,” cried Elizabeth. “I should never have said Mrs. Collins
was settled _near_ her family.”

“It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyond
the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.”

As he spoke there was a sort of smile, which Elizabeth fancied she
understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and
Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered,--

“I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her
family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many
varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expense of
travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the
case _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not
such a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my
friend would not call herself _near_ her family under less than _half_
the present distance.”

Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, “_You_ cannot
have a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_ cannot have
been always at Longbourn.”

Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of
feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and,
glancing over it, said, in a colder voice,--

“Are you pleased with Kent?”

A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side
calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte
and her sister, just returned from their walk. The _tête-à-tête_
surprised them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his
intruding on Miss Bennet, and, after sitting a few minutes longer,
without saying much to anybody, went away.

[Illustration: “Accompanied by their aunt”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“What can be the meaning of this?” said Charlotte, as soon as he was
gone. “My dear Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never
have called on us in this familiar way.”

But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely,
even to Charlotte’s wishes, to be the case; and, after various
conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from
the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable
from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there
was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot be
always within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the
two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither
almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes
separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their
aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he
had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended
him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in
being with him, as well as by his evident admiration, of her former
favourite, George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw there
was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam’s manners, she
believed he might have the best informed mind.

But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage it was more difficult
to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there
ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it
seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice to
propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really
animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel
Fitzwilliam’s occasionally laughing at his stupidity proved that he was
generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told
her; and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of
love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself
seriously to work to find it out: she watched him whenever they were at
Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He
certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that
look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often
doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it
seemed nothing but absence of mind.

She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his
being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.
Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of
raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her
opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend’s dislike would
vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.

In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying
Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was, beyond comparison, the pleasantest man: he
certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but,
to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage
in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.

[Illustration: “On looking up”]

CHAPTER XXXIII.

[Illustration]

More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park,
unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of the
mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought; and, to
prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him, at first,
that it was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time,
therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even the third. It seemed like
wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance; for on these occasions it was
not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away,
but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. He
never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking
or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third
encounter that he was asking some odd unconnected questions--about her
pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her
opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins’s happiness; and that in speaking of
Rosings, and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to
expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying
_there_ too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel
Fitzwilliam in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he must
mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressed her
a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the
pales opposite the Parsonage.

She was engaged one day, as she walked, in re-perusing Jane’s last
letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not
written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy,
she saw, on looking up, that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her.
Putting away the letter immediately, and forcing a smile, she said,--

“I did not know before that you ever walked this way.”

“I have been making the tour of the park,” he replied, “as I generally
do every year, and intended to close it with a call at the Parsonage.
Are you going much farther?”

“No, I should have turned in a moment.”

And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage
together.

“Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?” said she.

“Yes--if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. He
arranges the business just as he pleases.”

“And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least
great pleasure in the power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems
more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy.”

“He likes to have his own way very well,” replied Colonel Fitzwilliam.
“But so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having it than
many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak
feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and
dependence.”

“In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of
either. Now, seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and
dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from going
wherever you chose or procuring anything you had a fancy for?”

“These are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I have
experienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greater
weight, I may suffer from the want of money. Younger sons cannot marry
where they like.”

“Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often
do.”

“Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not many in
my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to
money.”

“Is this,” thought Elizabeth, “meant for me?” and she coloured at the
idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, “And pray, what is
the usual price of an earl’s younger son? Unless the elder brother is
very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.”

He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupt
a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed,
she soon afterwards said,--

“I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of
having somebody at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure a
lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well
for the present; and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he
likes with her.”

“No,” said Colonel Fitzwilliam, “that is an advantage which he must
divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.”

“Are you, indeed? And pray what sort of a guardian do you make? Does
your charge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes
a little difficult to manage; and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she
may like to have her own way.”

As she spoke, she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner
in which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to
give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other
got pretty near the truth. She directly replied,--

“You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I dare
say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a
very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.”

“I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant, gentlemanlike
man--he is a great friend of Darcy’s.”

“Oh yes,” said Elizabeth drily--“Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr.
Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.”

“Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of him in
those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me
in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted
to him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose
that Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.”

“What is it you mean?”

“It is a circumstance which Darcy of course could not wish to be
generally known, because if it were to get round to the lady’s family it
would be an unpleasant thing.”

“You may depend upon my not mentioning it.”

“And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to be
Bingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself
on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most
imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other
particulars; and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing him
the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from
knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.”

“Did Mr. Darcy give you his reasons for this interference?”

“I understood that there were some very strong objections against the
lady.”

“And what arts did he use to separate them?”

“He did not talk to me of his own arts,” said Fitzwilliam, smiling. “He
only told me what I have now told you.”

Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with
indignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she
was so thoughtful.

“I am thinking of what you have been telling me,” said she. “Your
cousin’s conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the
judge?”

“You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?”

“I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his
friend’s inclination; or why, upon his own judgment alone, he was to
determine and direct in what manner that friend was to be happy. But,”
she continued, recollecting herself, “as we know none of the
particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is not to be supposed
that there was much affection in the case.”

“That is not an unnatural surmise,” said Fitzwilliam; “but it is
lessening the honour of my cousin’s triumph very sadly.”

This was spoken jestingly, but it appeared to her so just a picture of
Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer; and,
therefore, abruptly changing the conversation, talked on indifferent
matters till they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room,
as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption
of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other
people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There
could not exist in the world _two_ men over whom Mr. Darcy could have
such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures
taken to separate Mr. Bingley and Jane, she had never doubted; but she
had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and
arrangement of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him,
_he_ was the cause--his pride and caprice were the cause--of all that
Jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a
while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart
in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have
inflicted.

“There were some very strong objections against the lady,” were Colonel
Fitzwilliam’s words; and these strong objections probably were, her
having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in
business in London.

“To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be no possibility of
objection,--all loveliness and goodness as she is! Her understanding
excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither could
anything be urged against my father, who, though with some
peculiarities, has abilities which Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain,
and respectability which he will probably never reach.” When she thought
of her mother, indeed, her confidence gave way a little; but she would
not allow that any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr.
Darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from
the want of importance in his friend’s connections than from their want
of sense; and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly
governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of
retaining Mr. Bingley for his sister.

The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned brought on a
headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening that, added to
her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend her
cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins,
seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go, and as much
as possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collins
could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine’s being rather
displeased by her staying at home.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XXXIV.

[Illustration]

When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as
much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the
examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her
being in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any
revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering.
But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that
cheerfulness which had been used to characterize her style, and which,
proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself, and kindly
disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth
noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an
attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy’s
shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict gave her a
keener sense of her sister’s sufferings. It was some consolation to
think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next,
and a still greater that in less than a fortnight she should herself be
with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her
spirits, by all that affection could do.

She could not think of Darcy’s leaving Kent without remembering that his
cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear
that he had no intentions at all, and, agreeable as he was, she did not
mean to be unhappy about him.

While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the
door-bell; and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its
being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in
the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her. But
this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently
affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the
room. In a hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her
health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better.
She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and
then getting up walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but
said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards her
in an agitated manner, and thus began:--

“In vain have I struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not be
repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love
you.”

Elizabeth’s astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured,
doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement,
and the avowal of all that he felt and had long felt for her immediately
followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besides those of the
heart to be detailed, and he was not more eloquent on the subject of
tenderness than of pride. His sense of her inferiority, of its being a
degradation, of the family obstacles which judgment had always opposed
to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the
consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his
suit.

In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible to
the compliment of such a man’s affection, and though her intentions did
not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to
receive; till roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she lost
all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself to
answer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded with
representing to her the strength of that attachment which in spite of
all his endeavours he had found impossible to conquer; and with
expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of
his hand. As he said this she could easily see that he had no doubt of a
favourable answer. He _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, but his
countenance expressed real security. Such a circumstance could only
exasperate farther; and when he ceased the colour rose into her cheeks
and she said,--

“In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to
express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however
unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation should be
felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. But I
cannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly
bestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to
anyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be
of short duration. The feelings which you tell me have long prevented
the acknowledgment of your regard can have little difficulty in
overcoming it after this explanation.”

Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantel-piece with his eyes fixed
on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than
surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of
his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the
appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed
himself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth’s feelings
dreadful. At length, in a voice of forced calmness, he said,--

“And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting! I
might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ at
civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance.”

“I might as well inquire,” replied she, “why, with so evident a design
of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me
against your will, against your reason, and even against your character?
Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil? But I have
other provocations. You know I have. Had not my own feelings decided
against you, had they been indifferent, or had they even been
favourable, do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept
the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the
happiness of a most beloved sister?”

As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion
was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she
continued,--

“I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can
excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You dare not,
you cannot deny that you have been the principal, if not the only means
of dividing them from each other, of exposing one to the censure of the
world for caprice and instability, the other to its derision for
disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest
kind.”

She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening
with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse.
He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.

“Can you deny that you have done it?” she repeated.

With assumed tranquillity he then replied, “I have no wish of denying
that I did everything in my power to separate my friend from your
sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _him_ I have been
kinder than towards myself.”

Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection,
but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.

“But it is not merely this affair,” she continued, “on which my dislike
is founded. Long before it had taken place, my opinion of you was
decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received
many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to
say? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?
or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?”

“You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s concerns,” said Darcy,
in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.

“Who that knows what his misfortunes have been can help feeling an
interest in him?”

“His misfortunes!” repeated Darcy, contemptuously,--“yes, his
misfortunes have been great indeed.”

“And of your infliction,” cried Elizabeth, with energy; “You have
reduced him to his present state of poverty--comparative poverty. You
have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed
for him. You have deprived the best years of his life of that
independence which was no less his due than his desert. You have done
all this! and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortunes with
contempt and ridicule.”

“And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,
“is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me! I
thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this
calculation, are heavy indeed! But, perhaps,” added he, stopping in his
walk, and turning towards her, “these offences might have been
overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the
scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. These
bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater
policy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of my
being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by
reflection, by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.
Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and just.
Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your
connections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relations whose
condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?”

Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to
the utmost to speak with composure when she said,--

“You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your
declaration affected me in any other way than as it spared me the
concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a
more gentlemanlike manner.”

She saw him start at this; but he said nothing, and she continued,--

“You could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way
that would have tempted me to accept it.”

Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an
expression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on,--

“From the very beginning, from the first moment, I may almost say, of my
acquaintance with you, your manners impressing me with the fullest
belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the
feelings of others, were such as to form that groundwork of
disapprobation, on which succeeding events have built so immovable a
dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the
last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.”

“You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend your
feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.
Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best
wishes for your health and happiness.”

And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him
the next moment open the front door and quit the house. The tumult of
her mind was now painfully great. She knew not how to support herself,
and, from actual weakness, sat down and cried for half an hour. Her
astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by
every review of it. That she should receive an offer of marriage from
Mr. Darcy! that he should have been in love with her for so many months!
so much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of all the objections
which had made him prevent his friend’s marrying her sister, and which
must appear at least with equal force in his own case, was almost
incredible! it was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong
an affection. But his pride, his abominable pride, his shameless avowal
of what he had done with respect to Jane, his unpardonable assurance in
acknowledging, though he could not justify it, and the unfeeling manner
which he had mentioned Mr. Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not
attempted to deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his
attachment had for a moment excited.

She continued in very agitating reflections till the sound of Lady
Catherine’s carriage made her feel how unequal she was to encounter
Charlotte’s observation, and hurried her away to her room.

[Illustration:

“Hearing herself called”
]

CHAPTER XXXV.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations
which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the
surprise of what had happened: it was impossible to think of anything
else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved soon after
breakfast to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceeding
directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy’s
sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,
she turned up the lane which led her farther from the turnpike road. The
park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one
of the gates into the ground.

After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was
tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and
look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had
made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the
verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her
walk, when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove
which edged the park: he was moving that way; and fearful of its being
Mr. Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was
now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness,
pronounced her name. She had turned away; but on hearing herself called,
though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again
towards the gate. He had by that time reached it also; and, holding out
a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty
composure, “I have been walking in the grove some time, in the hope of
meeting you. Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” and
then, with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon
out of sight.

With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity,
Elizabeth opened the letter, and to her still increasing wonder,
perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter paper, written
quite through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was likewise
full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated
from Rosings, at eight o’clock in the morning, and was as follows:--

“Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of
its containing any repetition of those sentiments, or renewal of those
offers, which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without any
intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes,
which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the
effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion,
should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written
and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand
your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I
demand it of your justice.

“Two offences of a very different nature, and by no means of equal
magnitude, you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was,
that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley
from your sister,--and the other, that I had, in defiance of various
claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate
prosperity and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and
wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged
favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other
dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect
its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young
persons whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could
bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last
night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope
to be in future secured, when the following account of my actions and
their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them which is due
to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be
offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. The necessity must
be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd. I had not been long in
Hertfordshire before I saw, in common with others, that Bingley
preferred your elder sister to any other young woman in the country. But
it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield that I had any
apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment. I had often seen him
in love before. At that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with
you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir William Lucas’s accidental
information, that Bingley’s attentions to your sister had given rise to
a general expectation of their marriage. He spoke of it as a certain
event, of which the time alone could be undecided. From that moment I
observed my friend’s behaviour attentively; and I could then perceive
that his partiality for Miss Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed
in him. Your sister I also watched. Her look and manners were open,
cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar
regard; and I remained convinced, from the evening’s scrutiny, that
though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite
them by any participation of sentiment. If _you_ have not been mistaken
here, _I_ must have been in an error. Your superior knowledge of your
sister must make the latter probable. If it be so, if I have been misled
by such error to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been
unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity of
your sister’s countenance and air was such as might have given the most
acute observer a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart
was not likely to be easily touched. That I was desirous of believing
her indifferent is certain; but I will venture to say that my
investigations and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or
fears. I did not believe her to be indifferent because I wished it; I
believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason.
My objections to the marriage were not merely those which I last night
acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside
in my own case; the want of connection could not be so great an evil to
my friend as to me. But there were other causes of repugnance; causes
which, though still existing, and existing to an equal degree in both
instances, I had myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not
immediately before me. These causes must be stated, though briefly. The
situation of your mother’s family, though objectionable, was nothing in
comparison of that total want of propriety so frequently, so almost
uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and
occasionally even by your father:--pardon me,--it pains me to offend
you. But amidst your concern for the defects of your nearest relations,
and your displeasure at this representation of them, let it give you
consolation to consider that to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid
any share of the like censure is praise no less generally bestowed on
you and your eldest sister than it is honourable to the sense and
disposition of both. I will only say, farther, that from what passed
that evening my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every
inducement heightened, which could have led me before to preserve my
friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy connection. He left
Netherfield for London on the day following, as you, I am certain,
remember, with the design of soon returning. The part which I acted is
now to be explained. His sisters’ uneasiness had been equally excited
with my own: our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered; and, alike
sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother, we
shortly resolved on joining him directly in London. We accordingly
went--and there I readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my
friend the certain evils of such a choice. I described and enforced them
earnestly. But however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed
his determination, I do not suppose that it would ultimately have
prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded by the assurance, which
I hesitated not in giving, of your sister’s indifference. He had before
believed her to return his affection with sincere, if not with equal,
regard. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger
dependence on my judgment than on his own. To convince him, therefore,
that he had deceived himself was no very difficult point. To persuade
him against returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been
given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for
having done thus much. There is but one part of my conduct, in the whole
affair, on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it is that I
condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from him
your sister’s being in town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss
Bingley; but her brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might
have met without ill consequence is, perhaps, probable; but his regard
did not appear to me enough extinguished for him to see her without some
danger. Perhaps this concealment, this disguise, was beneath me. It is
done, however, and it was done for the best. On this subject I have
nothing more to say, no other apology to offer. If I have wounded your
sister’s feelings, it was unknowingly done; and though the motives which
governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not
yet learnt to condemn them.--With respect to that other, more weighty
accusation, of having injured Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by
laying before you the whole of his connection with my family. Of what he
has _particularly_ accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what I
shall relate I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity.
Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many years
the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good conduct in
the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to be of service
to him; and on George Wickham, who was his godson, his kindness was
therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at school, and
afterwards at Cambridge; most important assistance, as his own father,
always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have been unable to
give him a gentleman’s education. My father was not only fond of this
young man’s society, whose manners were always engaging, he had also the
highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be his profession,
intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it is many, many years
since I first began to think of him in a very different manner. The
vicious propensities, the want of principle, which he was careful to
guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape the
observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself, and who
had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr. Darcy
could not have. Here again I shall give you pain--to what degree you
only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham has
created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding
his real character. It adds even another motive. My excellent father
died about five years ago; and his attachment to Mr. Wickham was to the
last so steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it to me to
promote his advancement in the best manner that his profession might
allow, and if he took orders, desired that a valuable family living
might be his as soon as it became vacant. There was also a legacy of
one thousand pounds. His own father did not long survive mine; and
within half a year from these events Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me
that, having finally resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should
not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate
pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he could not be
benefited. He had some intention, he added, of studying the law, and I
must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very
insufficient support therein. I rather wished than believed him to be
sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to his
proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman. The
business was therefore soon settled. He resigned all claim to assistance
in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to
receive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds. All connection
between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him
to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In town, I believe, he
chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence; and being
now free from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and
dissipation. For about three years I heard little of him; but on the
decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him,
he applied to me again by letter for the presentation. His
circumstances, he assured me, and I had no difficulty in believing it,
were exceedingly bad. He had found the law a most unprofitable study,
and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would present
him to the living in question--of which he trusted there could be little
doubt, as he was well assured that I had no other person to provide for,
and I could not have forgotten my revered father’s intentions. You will
hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for
resisting every repetition of it. His resentment was in proportion to
the distress of his circumstances--and he was doubtless as violent in
his abuse of me to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this
period, every appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How he lived, I
know not. But last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my
notice. I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish to forget
myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce me
to unfold to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of
your secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left
to the guardianship of my mother’s nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and
myself. About a year ago, she was taken from school, and an
establishment formed for her in London; and last summer she went with
the lady who presided over it to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr.
Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there proved to have been a prior
acquaintance between him and Mrs. Younge, in whose character we were
most unhappily deceived; and by her connivance and aid he so far
recommended himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a
strong impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she was
persuaded to believe herself in love and to consent to an elopement. She
was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after stating her
imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed the knowledge of it to
herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended
elopement; and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieving
and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father,
acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt and how I
acted. Regard for my sister’s credit and feelings prevented any public
exposure; but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place immediately,
and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from her charge. Mr. Wickham’s
chief object was unquestionably my sister’s fortune, which is thirty
thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of revenging
himself on me was a strong inducement. His revenge would have been
complete indeed. This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in
which we have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely
reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty
towards Mr. Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of
falsehood, he has imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be
wondered at, ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning
either. Detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly
not in your inclination. You may possibly wonder why all this was not
told you last night. But I was not then master enough of myself to know
what could or ought to be revealed. For the truth of everything here
related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of Colonel
Fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and
still more as one of the executors of my father’s will, has been
unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions. If
your abhorrence of _me_ should make _my_ assertions valueless, you
cannot be prevented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and
that there may be the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour
to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the
course of the morning. I will only add, God bless you.

“FITZWILLIAM DARCY.”

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XXXVI.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to
contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of
its contents. But such as they were, it may be well supposed how eagerly
she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.
Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did
she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power;
and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation to
give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong
prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of
what had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which
hardly left her power of comprehension; and from impatience of knowing
what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the
sense of the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister’s
insensibility she instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the
real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any
wish of doing him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done
which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all
pride and insolence.

But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham--when
she read, with somewhat clearer attention, a relation of events which,
if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which
bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself--her feelings
were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition.
Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished
to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, “This must be false!
This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!”--and when she had
gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the
last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not
regard it, that she would never look in it again.

In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
nothing, she walked on; but it would not do: in half a minute the letter
was unfolded again; and collecting herself as well as she could, she
again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and
commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.
The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly
what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy,
though she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his
own words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to
the will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living
was fresh in her memory; and as she recalled his very words, it was
impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the
other, and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did
not err. But when she read and re-read, with the closest attention, the
particulars immediately following of Wickham’s resigning all pretensions
to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three
thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down the
letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be
impartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but with
little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read on.
But every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had
believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to
render Mr. Darcy’s conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a
turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.

The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay to
Mr. Wickham’s charge exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could
bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his
entrance into the ----shire militia, in which he had engaged at the
persuasion of the young man, who, on meeting him accidentally in town,
had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life,
nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told

[Illustration:

     “Meeting accidentally in Town”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

himself. As to his real character, had information been in her power,
she had never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and
manner, had established him at once in the possession of every virtue.
She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished
trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the
attacks of Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone
for those casual errors, under which she would endeavour to class what
Mr. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years’
continuance. But no such recollection befriended her. She could see him
instantly before her, in every charm of air and address, but she could
remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the
neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had gained him in
the mess. After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once
more continued to read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his
designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed
between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at
last she was referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel
Fitzwilliam himself--from whom she had previously received the
information of his near concern in all his cousin’s affairs and whose
character she had no reason to question. At one time she had almost
resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness
of the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that
Mr. Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been
well assured of his cousin’s corroboration.

She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation
between Wickham and herself in their first evening at Mr. Philips’s.
Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was _now_
struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and
wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting
himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions
with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear
of seeing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that
_he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball
the very next week. She remembered, also, that till the Netherfield
family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but
herself; but that after their removal, it had been everywhere discussed;
that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy’s
character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would
always prevent his exposing the son.

How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! His
attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and
hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer
the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything.
His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive: he had
either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying
his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most
incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter
and fainter; and in further justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not
but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago
asserted his blamelessness in the affair;--that, proud and repulsive as
were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their
acquaintance--an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much
together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways--seen anything
that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust--anything that spoke him
of irreligious or immoral habits;--that among his own connections he was
esteemed and valued;--that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a
brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his
sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling;--that had his
actions been what Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of
everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and
that friendship between a person capable of it and such an amiable man
as Mr. Bingley was incomprehensible.

She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham
could she think, without feeling that she had been blind, partial,
prejudiced, absurd.

“How despicably have I acted!” she cried. “I, who have prided myself on
my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! who have
often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my
vanity in useless or blameless distrust. How humiliating is this
discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could not
have been more wretchedly blind. But vanity, not love, has been my
folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect
of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away where either were
concerned. Till this moment, I never knew myself.”

From herself to Jane, from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line
which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy’s explanation
_there_ had appeared very insufficient; and she read it again. Widely
different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that
credit to his assertions, in one instance, which she had been obliged to
give in the other? He declared himself to have been totally unsuspicious
of her sister’s attachment; and she could not help remembering what
Charlotte’s opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice
of his description of Jane. She felt that Jane’s feelings, though
fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant
complacency in her air and manner, not often united with great
sensibility.

When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were
mentioned, in tones of such mortifying, yet merited, reproach, her sense
of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly
for denial; and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded, as
having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first
disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind
than on hers.

The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed, but
it could not console her for the contempt which had been thus
self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered that
Jane’s disappointment had, in fact, been the work of her nearest
relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt
by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she
had ever known before.

After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
variety of thought, reconsidering events, determining probabilities, and
reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so
important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at
length return home; and she entered the house with the wish of appearing
cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such reflections as
must make her unfit for conversation.

She was immediately told, that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each
called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take
leave, but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least
an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her
till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern in
missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no
longer an object. She could think only of her letter.

[Illustration:

“His parting obeisance”
]

CHAPTER XXXVII.

[Illustration]

The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning; and Mr. Collins having
been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was
able to bring home the pleasing intelligence of their appearing in very
good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the
melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then
hastened to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return
brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her Ladyship,
importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of
having them all to dine with her.

Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had
she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as her
future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her
Ladyship’s indignation would have been. “What would she have said? how
would she have behaved?” were the questions with which she amused
herself.

Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings’ party. “I assure
you, I feel it exceedingly,” said Lady Catherine; “I believe nobody
feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly
attached to these young men; and know them to be so much attached to me!
They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The dear
Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy
seemed to feel it most acutely--more, I think, than last year. His
attachment to Rosings certainly increases.”

Mr. Collins had a compliment and an allusion to throw in here, which
were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.

Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of
spirits; and immediately accounting for it herself, by supposing that
she did not like to go home again so soon, she added,--

“But if that is the case, you must write to your mother to beg that you
may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your
company, I am sure.”

“I am much obliged to your Ladyship for your kind invitation,” replied
Elizabeth; “but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town
next Saturday.”

“Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected
you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There
can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly
spare you for another fortnight.”

“But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.”

[Illustration:

“Dawson”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“Oh, your father, of course, may spare you, if your mother can.
Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will
stay another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to take one of you
as far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and
as Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good
room for one of you--and, indeed, if the weather should happen to be
cool, I should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you
large.”

“You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our
original plan.”

Lady Catherine seemed resigned. “Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant
with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea
of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper.
You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in the
world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly
guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When my
niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her
having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr.
Darcy of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with
propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all those
things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I am
glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be
discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone.”

“My uncle is to send a servant for us.”

“Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad you
have somebody who thinks of those things. Where shall you change horses?
Oh, Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be
attended to.”

Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey;
and as she did not answer them all herself attention was
necessary--which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a
mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection
must be reserved for solitary hours: whenever she was alone, she gave
way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a
solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of
unpleasant recollections.

Mr. Darcy’s letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She
studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at
times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address,
she was still full of indignation: but when she considered how unjustly
she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against
herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.
His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect: but she
could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or
feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past
behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret: and in
the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin.
They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at
them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his
youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right
herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently
united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine
and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother’s indulgence,
what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,
irritable, and completely under Lydia’s guidance, had been always
affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would
scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While
there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while
Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there for
ever.

Anxiety on Jane’s behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy’s
explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion,
heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved to
have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any
could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How
grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every
respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had
been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!

When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham’s
character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had
seldom been depressed before were now so much affected as to make it
almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.

Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of
her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent
there; and her Ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of
their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing,
and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right
way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the
work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.

When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them
a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;
and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to courtesy and hold out
her hand to both.

[Illustration:

“The elevation of his feelings.”
]

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

[Illustration]

On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few
minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of
paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.

“I know not, Miss Elizabeth,” said he, “whether Mrs. Collins has yet
expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very
certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for
it. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We know
how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain
manner of living, our small rooms, and few domestics, and the little we
see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like
yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,
and that we have done everything in our power to prevent you spending
your time unpleasantly.”

Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She had
spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with
Charlotte, and the kind attention she had received, must make _her_ feel
the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified; and with a more smiling
solemnity replied,--

“It gives me the greatest pleasure to hear that you have passed your
time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most
fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior
society, and from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of
varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that
your Hunsford visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation
with regard to Lady Catherine’s family is, indeed, the sort of
extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see on
what a footing we are. You see how continually we are engaged there. In
truth, I must acknowledge, that, with all the disadvantages of this
humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of
compassion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at Rosings.”

Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was
obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility
and truth in a few short sentences.

“You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into
Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself, at least, that you will
be able to do so. Lady Catherine’s great attentions to Mrs. Collins you
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
that your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this point it will be
as well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth,
that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in
marriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of
thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of
character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each
other.”

Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was
the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed
and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to
have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the lady from
whom they sprang. Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such
society! But she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently
regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for
compassion. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry,
and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.

At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels
placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate
parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by
Mr. Collins; and as they walked down the garden, he was commissioning
her with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks
for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his
compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed
her in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed,
when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies of Rosings.

[Illustration:

“They had forgotten to leave any message”
]

“But,” he added, “you will of course wish to have your humble respects
delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you
while you have been here.”

Elizabeth made no objection: the door was then allowed to be shut, and
the carriage drove off.

“Good gracious!” cried Maria, after a few minutes’ silence, “it seems
but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many things have
happened!”

“A great many indeed,” said her companion, with a sigh.

“We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice!
How much I shall have to tell!”

Elizabeth privately added, “And how much I shall have to conceal!”

Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and
within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner’s
house, where they were to remain a few days.

Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her
spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt
had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at
Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.

It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for
Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy’s proposals. To know
that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish
Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own
vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation
to openness as nothing could have conquered, but the state of indecision
in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate,
and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into
repeating something of Bingley, which might only grieve her sister
further.

[Illustration:

     “How nicely we are crammed in”
]

CHAPTER XXXIX.

[Illustration]

It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out
together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire;
and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet’s carriage was
to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman’s
punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room upstairs.
These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed
in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and
dressing a salad and cucumber.

After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set
out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming,
“Is not this nice? is not this an agreeable surprise?”

“And we mean to treat you all,” added Lydia; “but you must lend us the
money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.” Then showing
her purchases,--“Look here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not think it
is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall
pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any
better.”

And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect
unconcern, “Oh, but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and
when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I
think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what
one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they
are going in a fortnight.”

“Are they, indeed?” cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.

“They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to
take us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme,
and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to
go, too, of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall
have!”

“Yes,” thought Elizabeth; “_that_ would be a delightful scheme, indeed,
and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton and a whole
campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor
regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!”

“Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia, as they sat down to
table. “What do you think? It is excellent news, capital news, and about
a certain person that we all like.”

Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told that he
need not stay. Lydia laughed, and said,--

“Ay, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the
waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse
things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad
he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for
my news: it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is not it?
There is no danger of Wickham’s marrying Mary King--there’s for you! She
is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool; gone to stay. Wickham is safe.”

“And Mary King is safe!” added Elizabeth; “safe from a connection
imprudent as to fortune.”

“She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him.”

“But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side,” said Jane.

“I am sure there is not on _his_. I will answer for it, he never cared
three straws about her. Who _could_ about such a nasty little freckled
thing?”

Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such
coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_
was little other than her own breast had formerly harboured and fancied
liberal!

As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
ordered; and, after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their
boxes, workbags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty’s and
Lydia’s purchases, were seated in it.

“How nicely we are crammed in!” cried Lydia. “I am glad I brought my
bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another band-box! Well, now
let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way
home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all
since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any
flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband
before you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare.
She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord! how ashamed I should be of not
being married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Philips wants you so to
get husbands you can’t think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr.
Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord!
how I should like to be married before any of you! and then I would
_chaperon_ you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece
of fun the other day at Colonel Forster’s! Kitty and me were to spend
the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the
evening; (by-the-bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so
she asked the two Harringtons to come: but Harriet was ill, and so Pen
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We
dressed up Chamberlayne in woman’s clothes, on purpose to pass for a
lady,--only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs.
Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow
one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny,
and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they
did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs.
Forster. I thought I should have died. And _that_ made the men suspect
something, and then they soon found out what was the matter.”

With such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes did Lydia,
assisted by Kitty’s hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her
companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she
could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham’s name.

Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane
in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet
say voluntarily to Elizabeth,----

“I am glad you are come back, Lizzy.”

Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases
came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects
which occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, across the
table, after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet
was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present
fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and on the other,
retailing them all to the younger Miss Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice
rather louder than any other person’s, was enumerating the various
pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her.

“Oh, Mary,” said she, “I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun!
as we went along Kitty and me drew up all the blinds, and pretended
there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if
Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we
behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest
cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have
treated you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought
we never should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter.
And then we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so
loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!”

To this, Mary very gravely replied, “Far be it from me, my dear sister,
to depreciate such pleasures. They would doubtless be congenial with the
generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for
_me_. I should infinitely prefer a book.”

But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to
anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.

In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to
Meryton, and see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed
the scheme. It should not be said, that the Miss Bennets could not be at
home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers. There was
another reason, too, for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Wickham
again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to
_her_, of the regiment’s approaching removal, was indeed beyond
expression. In a fortnight they were to go, and once gone, she hoped
there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.

She had not been many hours at home, before she found that the Brighton
scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under
frequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly that her
father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were
at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often
disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XL.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth’s impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could no
longer be overcome; and at length resolving to suppress every particular
in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be surprised,
she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between Mr.
Darcy and herself.

Miss Bennet’s astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly
partiality which made any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly
natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was
sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so
little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the
unhappiness which her sister’s refusal must have given him.

“His being so sure of succeeding was wrong,” said she, “and certainly
ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his
disappointment.”

“Indeed,” replied Elizabeth, “I am heartily sorry for him; but he has
other feelings which will probably soon drive away his regard for me.
You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?”

“Blame you! Oh, no.”

“But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?”

“No--I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.”

“But you _will_ know it, when I have told you what happened the very
next day.”

She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far
as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane,
who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that
so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind as was here
collected in one individual! Nor was Darcy’s vindication, though
grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery.
Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and
seek to clear one, without involving the other.

“This will not do,” said Elizabeth; “you never will be able to make both
of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied
with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just
enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting
about pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Mr.
Darcy’s, but you shall do as you choose.”

It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane.

“I do not know when I have been more shocked,” said she. “Wickham so
very bad! It is almost past belief. And poor Mr. Darcy! dear Lizzy,
only consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and
with the knowledge of your ill opinion too! and having to relate such a
thing of his sister! It is really too distressing, I am sure you must
feel it so.”

“Oh no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full
of both. I know you will do him such ample justice, that I am growing
every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion makes me
saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will be as
light as a feather.”

“Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in his
countenance! such an openness and gentleness in his manner.”

“There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those
two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the
appearance of it.”

“I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it as you
used to do.”

“And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike
to him, without any reason. It is such a spur to one’s genius, such an
opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually
abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot be always laughing
at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.”

“Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat
the matter as you do now.”

“Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough, I was very
uncomfortable--I may say unhappy. And with no one to speak to of what I
felt, no Jane to comfort me, and say that I had not been so very weak,
and vain, and nonsensical, as I knew I had! Oh, how I wanted you!”

“How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions
in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they _do_ appear wholly
undeserved.”

“Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most
natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There is
one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I
ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintance in general understand
Wickham’s character.”

Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, “Surely there can be no
occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your own opinion?”

“That it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy has not authorized me to
make his communication public. On the contrary, every particular
relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to
myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his
conduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Mr. Darcy is
so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in
Meryton, to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal to
it. Wickham will soon be gone; and, therefore, it will not signify to
anybody here what he really is. Some time hence it will be all found
out, and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before.
At present I will say nothing about it.”

“You are quite right. To have his errors made public might ruin him for
ever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to
re-establish a character. We must not make him desperate.”

The tumult of Elizabeth’s mind was allayed by this conversation. She
had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a
fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she
might wish to talk again of either. But there was still something
lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not
relate the other half of Mr. Darcy’s letter, nor explain to her sister
how sincerely she had been valued by his friend. Here was knowledge in
which no one could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than
a perfect understanding between the parties could justify her in
throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery. “And then,” said she, “if
that very improbable event should ever take place, I shall merely be
able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner
himself. The liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost
all its value!”

She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real
state of her sister’s spirits. Jane was not happy. She still cherished a
very tender affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied herself in
love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment, and from
her age and disposition, greater steadiness than first attachments often
boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to
every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the
feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the indulgence of those
regrets which must have been injurious to her own health and their
tranquillity.

“Well, Lizzy,” said Mrs. Bennet, one day, “what is your opinion _now_ of
this sad business of Jane’s? For my part, I am determined never to speak
of it again to anybody. I told my sister Philips so the other day. But I
cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in London. Well, he is a
very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there is the least
chance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of his
coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of
everybody, too, who is likely to know.”

[Illustration:

     “I am determined never to speak of it again”
]

“I do not believe that he will ever live at Netherfield any more.”

“Oh, well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come; though I
shall always say that he used my daughter extremely ill; and, if I was
her, I would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure
Jane will die of a broken heart, and then he will be sorry for what he
has done.”

But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation she
made no answer.

“Well, Lizzy,” continued her mother, soon afterwards, “and so the
Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope it
will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an
excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her mother,
she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in _their_
housekeeping, I dare say.”

“No, nothing at all.”

“A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes. _They_ will
take care not to outrun their income. _They_ will never be distressed
for money. Well, much good may it do them! And so, I suppose, they often
talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look upon it
quite as their own, I dare say, whenever that happens.”

“It was a subject which they could not mention before me.”

“No; it would have been strange if they had. But I make no doubt they
often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an
estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. _I_ should be
ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.”

[Illustration:

“When Colonel Miller’s regiment went away”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER XLI.

[Illustration]

The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was
the last of the regiment’s stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in
the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost
universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink,
and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very
frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and
Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such
hard-heartedness in any of the family.

“Good Heaven! What is to become of us? What are we to do?” would they
often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. “How can you be smiling so,
Lizzy?”

Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what
she had herself endured on a similar occasion five-and-twenty years ago.

“I am sure,” said she, “I cried for two days together when Colonel
Miller’s regiment went away. I thought I should have broke my heart.”

“I am sure I shall break _mine_,” said Lydia.

“If one could but go to Brighton!” observed Mrs. Bennet.

“Oh yes!--if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is so disagreeable.”

“A little sea-bathing would set me up for ever.”

“And my aunt Philips is sure it would do _me_ a great deal of good,”
added Kitty.

Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through
Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense
of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy’s
objections; and never had she before been so much disposed to pardon his
interference in the views of his friend.

But the gloom of Lydia’s prospect was shortly cleared away; for she
received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of the
regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a
very young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good-humour
and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of
their _three_ months’ acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.

The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster,
the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely
to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister’s feelings, Lydia flew
about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone’s
congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever;
whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at her fate
in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.

“I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask _me_ as well as Lydia,”
said she, “though I am _not_ her particular friend. I have just as much
right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.”

In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and Jane to make
her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from
exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she
considered it as the death-warrant of all possibility of common sense
for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her, were it
known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her
go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia’s general
behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of
such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more
imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must
be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said,--

“Lydia will never be easy till she has exposed herself in some public
place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little
expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present
circumstances.”

“If you were aware,” said Elizabeth, “of the very great disadvantage to
us all, which must arise from the public notice of Lydia’s unguarded and
imprudent manner, nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you
would judge differently in the affair.”

“Already arisen!” repeated Mr. Bennet. “What! has she frightened away
some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such
squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity
are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of the pitiful fellows
who have been kept aloof by Lydia’s folly.”

“Indeed, you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent. It is not
of peculiar, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our
importance, our respectability in the world, must be affected by the
wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark
Lydia’s character. Excuse me,--for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear
father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and
of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of
her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character
will be fixed; and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt
that ever made herself and her family ridiculous;--a flirt, too, in the
worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond
youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness of
her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal
contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In this danger Kitty
is also comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain,
ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh, my dear father, can you
suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever
they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the
disgrace?”

Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject; and,
affectionately taking her hand, said, in reply,--

“Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known,
you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less
advantage for having a couple of--or I may say, three--very silly
sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to
Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will
keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an
object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of less importance
even as a common flirt than she has been here. The officers will find
women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being
there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow
many degrees worse, without authorizing us to lock her up for the rest
of her life.”

With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion
continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not
in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them.
She was confident of having performed her duty; and to fret over
unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her
disposition.

Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her
father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their
united volubility. In Lydia’s imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised
every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye
of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers.
She saw herself the object of attention to tens and to scores of them at
present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp: its tents
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young
and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she
saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six
officers at once.

[Illustration:

“Tenderly flirting”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

Had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and
such realities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could
have been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the
same. Lydia’s going to Brighton was all that consoled her for the
melancholy conviction of her husband’s never intending to go there
himself.

But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures
continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia’s leaving
home.

Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been
frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty
well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had even
learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted her,
an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his present
behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure;
for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those attentions which
had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after
what had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern for him in
finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the
reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever
cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified,
and her preference secured, at any time, by their renewal.

On the very last day of the regiment’s remaining in Meryton, he dined,
with others of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth
disposed to part from him in good-humour, that, on his making some
inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she
mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s and Mr. Darcy’s having both spent three
weeks at Rosings, and asked him if he were acquainted with the former.

He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but, with a moment’s
recollection, and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen
him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man,
asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour.
With an air of indifference, he soon afterwards added, “How long did you
say that he was at Rosings?”

“Nearly three weeks.”

“And you saw him frequently?”

“Yes, almost every day.”

“His manners are very different from his cousin’s.”

“Yes, very different; but I think Mr. Darcy improves on acquaintance.”

“Indeed!” cried Wickham, with a look which did not escape her. “And pray
may I ask--” but checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, “Is it in
address that he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of civility to his
ordinary style? for I dare not hope,” he continued, in a lower and more
serious tone, “that he is improved in essentials.”

“Oh, no!” said Elizabeth. “In essentials, I believe, he is very much
what he ever was.”

While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to
rejoice over her words or to distrust their meaning. There was a
something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive
and anxious attention, while she added,--

“When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that
either his mind or manners were in a state of improvement; but that,
from knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.”

Wickham’s alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated
look; for a few minutes he was silent; till, shaking off his
embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of
accents,--

“You, who so well know my feelings towards Mr. Darcy, will readily
comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume
even the _appearance_ of what is right. His pride, in that direction,
may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must deter
him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I only fear that
the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been alluding, is
merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and
judgment he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always operated, I
know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his
wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I am certain he
has very much at heart.”

Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a
slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on
the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge
him. The rest of the evening passed with the _appearance_, on his side,
of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish
Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a
mutual desire of never meeting again.

When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton,
from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation
between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the
only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs.
Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter,
and impressive in her injunctions that she would not miss the
opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible,--advice which there
was every reason to believe would be attended to; and, in the clamorous
happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus
of her sisters were uttered without being heard.

[Illustration:

The arrival of the
Gardiners
]

CHAPTER XLII.

[Illustration]

Had Elizabeth’s opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could
not have formed a very pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic
comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance
of good-humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a
woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in
their marriage put an end to all real affection for her. Respect,
esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views of
domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of a
disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own
imprudence had brought on in any of those pleasures which too often
console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of
the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal
enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted than as
her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not
the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his
wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true
philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.

Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her
father’s behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but
respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of
herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to
banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation
and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own
children, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so
strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so
unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising
from so ill-judged a direction of talents--talents which, rightly used,
might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even
if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.

When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham’s departure, she found little
other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties
abroad were less varied than before; and at home she had a mother and
sister, whose constant repinings at the dulness of everything around
them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty
might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers
of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition
greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her
folly and assurance, by a situation of such double danger as a
watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what
has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had looked
forward with impatient desire, did not, in taking place, bring all the
satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to
name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity; to have
some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by
again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the
present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes
was now the object of her happiest thoughts: it was her best consolation
for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother
and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the
scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.

“But it is fortunate,” thought she, “that I have something to wish for.
Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.
But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my
sister’s absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of
pleasure realized. A scheme of which every part promises delight can
never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by
the defence of some little peculiar vexation.”

When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely
to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and
always very short. Those to her mother contained little else than that
they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers
had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as
made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which
she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a
violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going to the
camp; and from her correspondence with her sister there was still less
to be learnt, for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much
too full of lines under the words to be made public.

After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health,
good-humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn. Everything
wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter
came back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs.
Bennet was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and by the middle
of June Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton
without tears,--an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth
hope, that by the following Christmas she might be so tolerably
reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by
some cruel and malicious arrangement at the War Office, another regiment
should be quartered in Meryton.

The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast
approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter
arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and
curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from
setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again
within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so
far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with
the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up
the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour; and, according to the
present plan, were to go no farther northward than Derbyshire. In that
county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three
weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The
town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where
they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of
her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,
Dovedale, or the Peak.

Elizabeth was excessively disappointed: she had set her heart on seeing
the Lakes; and still thought there might have been time enough. But it
was her business to be satisfied--and certainly her temper to be happy;
and all was soon right again.

With the mention of Derbyshire, there were many ideas connected. It was
impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its
owner. “But surely,” said she, “I may enter his county with impunity,
and rob it of a few petrified spars, without his perceiving me.”

The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away
before her uncle and aunt’s arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr. and
Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at
Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two
younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin
Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and
sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every
way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.

The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next
morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. One
enjoyment was certain--that of suitableness as companions; a
suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
inconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affection
and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were
disappointments abroad.

It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire,
nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither
lay--Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc., are
sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present
concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner’s
former residence, and where she had lately learned that some
acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen
all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of
Lambton, Elizabeth found, from her aunt, that Pemberley was situated. It
was not in their direct road; nor more than a mile or two out of it. In
talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an
inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his
willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.

“My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so
much?” said her aunt. “A place, too, with which so many of your
acquaintance are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you
know.”

Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at
Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She
must own that she was tired of great houses: after going over so many,
she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.

Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. “If it were merely a fine house
richly furnished,” said she, “I should not care about it myself; but the
grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in the
country.”

Elizabeth said no more; but her mind could not acquiesce. The
possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly
occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea; and
thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt, than to run such
a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved
that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries as to the
absence of the family were unfavourably answered.

Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid
whether Pemberley were not a very fine place, what was the name of its
proprietor, and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for
the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question; and her
alarms being now removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of
curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the
next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and
with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike
to the scheme.

To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.

[Illustration:

     “Conjecturing as to the date”
]

CHAPTER XLIII.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of
Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned
in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.

The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They
entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through
a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.

Elizabeth’s mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired
every remarkable spot and point of view. They gradually ascended for
half a mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by
Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of the valley, into which
the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone
building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high
woody hills; and in front a stream of some natural importance was
swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. Its banks
were neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She
had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural
beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They were
all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that
to be mistress of Pemberley might be something!

They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and,
while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of
meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been
mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the
hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to
wonder at her being where she was.

The housekeeper came; a respectable looking elderly woman, much less
fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her. They
followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well-proportioned
room, handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went
to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, from
which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the
distance, was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was
good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered
on its banks, and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace
it, with delight. As they passed into other rooms, these objects were
taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties
to be seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture
suitable to the fortune of their proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with
admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly
fine,--with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the
furniture of Rosings.

“And of this place,” thought she, “I might have been mistress! With
these rooms I might have now been familiarly acquainted! Instead of
viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and
welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But, no,” recollecting
herself, “that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to
me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.”

This was a lucky recollection--it saved her from something like regret.

She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master were really
absent, but had not courage for it. At length, however, the question was
asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds
replied, that he was; adding, “But we expect him to-morrow, with a large
party of friends.” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had
not by any circumstance been delayed a day!

Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached, and saw
the likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other
miniatures, over the mantel-piece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how
she liked it. The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was the
picture of a young gentleman, the son of her late master’s steward, who
had been brought up by him at his own expense. “He is now gone into the
army,” she added; “but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.”

Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not
return it.

“And that,” said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures,
“is my master--and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the
other--about eight years ago.”

“I have heard much of your master’s fine person,” said Mrs. Gardiner,
looking at the picture; “it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell
us whether it is like or not.”

Mrs. Reynolds’ respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this
intimation of her knowing her master.

“Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?”

Elizabeth coloured, and said, “A little.”

“And do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, ma’am?”

“Yes, very handsome.”

“I am sure _I_ know none so handsome; but in the gallery upstairs you
will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my late
master’s favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to
be then. He was very fond of them.”

This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham’s being among them.

Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn
when she was only eight years old.

“And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?” said Mr. Gardiner.

“Oh, yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so
accomplished! She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is a
new instrument just come down for her--a present from my master: she
comes here to-morrow with him.”

Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were easy and pleasant, encouraged her
communicativeness by his questions and remarks: Mrs. Reynolds, either
from pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her
master and his sister.

“Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?”

“Not so much as I could wish, sir: but I dare say he may spend half his
time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months.”

“Except,” thought Elizabeth, “when she goes to Ramsgate.”

“If your master would marry, you might see more of him.”

“Yes, sir; but I do not know when _that_ will be. I do not know who is
good enough for him.”

Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not help saying, “It is
very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so.”

“I say no more than the truth, and what everybody will say that knows
him,” replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far;
and she listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added,
“I have never had a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him
ever since he was four years old.”

This was praise of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her
ideas. That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion.
Her keenest attention was awakened: she longed to hear more; and was
grateful to her uncle for saying,--

“There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky in
having such a master.”

“Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could not
meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are
good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he
was always the sweetest tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the
world.”

Elizabeth almost stared at her. “Can this be Mr. Darcy?” thought she.

“His father was an excellent man,” said Mrs. Gardiner.

“Yes, ma’am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him--just
as affable to the poor.”

Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs.
Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects
of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the
furniture in vain. Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family
prejudice, to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her
master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his
many merits, as they proceeded together up the great staircase.

“He is the best landlord, and the best master,” said she, “that ever
lived. Not like the wild young men now-a-days, who think of nothing but
themselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but what will
give him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never
saw anything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle
away like other young men.”

“In what an amiable light does this place him!” thought Elizabeth.

“This fine account of him,” whispered her aunt as they walked, “is not
quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.”

“Perhaps we might be deceived.”

“That is not very likely; our authority was too good.”

On reaching the spacious lobby above, they were shown into a very pretty
sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than
the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to
give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room, when
last at Pemberley.

“He is certainly a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as she walked towards
one of the windows.

Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy’s delight, when she should enter
the room. “And this is always the way with him,” she added. “Whatever
can give his sister any pleasure, is sure to be done in a moment. There
is nothing he would not do for her.”

The picture gallery, and two or three of the principal bed-rooms, were
all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings:
but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already
visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss
Darcy’s, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and
also more intelligible.

In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have
little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked on in quest
of the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it
arrested her--and she beheld a striking resemblance of Mr. Darcy, with
such a smile over the face, as she remembered to have sometimes seen,
when he looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in
earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the
gallery. Mrs. Reynolds informed them, that it had been taken in his
father’s lifetime.

There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth’s mind, a more gentle
sensation towards the original than she had ever felt in the height of
their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds
was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praise
of an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, she
considered how many people’s happiness were in his guardianship! How
much of pleasure or pain it was in his power to bestow! How much of good
or evil must be done by him! Every idea that had been brought forward by
the housekeeper was favourable to his character; and as she stood before
the canvas, on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon
herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude
than it had ever raised before: she remembered its warmth, and softened
its impropriety of expression.

When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen,
they returned down stairs; and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were
consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall door.

As they walked across the lawn towards the river, Elizabeth turned back
to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also; and while the former was
conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself
suddenly came forward from the road which led behind it to the stables.

They were within twenty yards of each other; and so abrupt was his
appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes
instantly met, and the cheeks of each were overspread with the deepest
blush. He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from
surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party,
and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least
of perfect civility.

She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach,
received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be
overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture
they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two
that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener’s expression of surprise, on
beholding his master, must immediately have told it. They stood a little
aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,
scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she
returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the
alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he
uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the
impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few
minutes in which they continued together were some of the most
uncomfortable of her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he
spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his
inquiries as to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her stay
in Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the
distraction of his thoughts.

At length, every idea seemed to fail him; and after standing a few
moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took
leave.

The others then joined her, and expressed their admiration of his
figure; but Elizabeth heard not a word, and, wholly engrossed by her own
feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and
vexation. Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged
thing in the world! How strange must it appear to him! In what a
disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man! It might seem as if
she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come?
or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been
only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his
discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment arrived, that
moment alighted from his horse or his carriage. She blushed again and
again over the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so
strikingly altered,--what could it mean? That he should even speak to
her was amazing!--but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her
family! Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified,
never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting.
What a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when
he put his letter into her hand! She knew not what to think, or how to
account for it.

They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and
every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer
reach of the woods to which they were approaching: but it was some time
before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered
mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed
to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she
distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that
one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then
was. She longed to know what at that moment was passing in his mind; in
what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything,
she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been civil only because he
felt himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in his voice, which was
not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing
her, she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with
composure.

At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind
roused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.

They entered the woods, and, bidding adieu to the river for a while,
ascended some of the higher grounds; whence, in spots where the opening
of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of
the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods
overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner
expressed a wish of going round the whole park, but feared it might be
beyond a walk. With a triumphant smile, they were told, that it was ten
miles round. It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed
circuit; which brought them again, after some time, in a descent among
hanging woods, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts.
They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of
the scene: it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and
the valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the
stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered
it. Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed
the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner,
who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of
returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was,
therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house
on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their
progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the
taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the
occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the man
about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this
slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth’s astonishment was
quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy
approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk being here less
sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before they
met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an
interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with
calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed,
she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea
lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the
turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance she saw that
he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness,
she began as they met to admire the beauty of the place; but she had not
got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” when some unlucky
recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pemberley from
her might be mischievously construed. Her colour changed, and she said
no more.

Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked
her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends.
This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and
she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the
acquaintance of some of those very people, against whom his pride had
revolted, in his offer to herself. “What will be his surprise,” thought
she, “when he knows who they are! He takes them now for people of
fashion.”

The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their
relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore
it; and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he
could from such disgraceful companions. That he was _surprised_ by the
connection was evident: he sustained it, however, with fortitude: and,
so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into
conversation with Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased,
could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should know she had some
relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most
attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence,
his taste, or his good manners.

The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard Mr. Darcy
invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he
chose, while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same
time to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of
the stream where there was usually most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who was
walking arm in arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of her
wonder. Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the
compliment must be all for herself. Her astonishment, however, was
extreme; and continually was she repeating, “Why is he so altered? From
what can it proceed? It cannot be for _me_, it cannot be for _my_ sake
that his manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not
work such a change as this. It is impossible that he should still love
me.”

After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two
gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the
brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious
water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in
Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found
Elizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred
her husband’s. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on
together. After a short silence the lady first spoke. She wished him to
know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the
place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been
very unexpected--“for your housekeeper,” she added, “informed us that
you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and, indeed, before we
left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected in
the country.” He acknowledged the truth of it all; and said that
business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours
before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. “They
will join me early to-morrow,” he continued, “and among them are some
who will claim an acquaintance with you,--Mr. Bingley and his sisters.”

Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly
driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley’s name had been last mentioned
between them; and if she might judge from his complexion, _his_ mind was
not very differently engaged.

“There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after a
pause, “who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow
me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance
during your stay at Lambton?”

The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great
for her to know in what manner she acceded to it. She immediately felt
that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with her,
must be the work of her brother, and without looking farther, it was
satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made
him think really ill of her.

They now walked on in silence; each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth
was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and
pleased. His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of
the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others; and when they had
reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a
mile behind.

He then asked her to walk into the house--but she declared herself not
tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might
have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but
there seemed an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected that
she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dovedale with
great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly--and her patience
and her ideas were nearly worn out before the _tête-à-tête_ was over.

On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s coming up they were all pressed to go into
the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they
parted on each side with the utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the
ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him
walking slowly towards the house.

The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them
pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected.

“He is perfectly well-behaved, polite, and unassuming,” said her uncle.

“There _is_ something a little stately in him, to be sure,” replied her
aunt; “but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now
say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud,
_I_ have seen nothing of it.”

“I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more
than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such
attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.”

“To be sure, Lizzy,” said her aunt, “he is not so handsome as Wickham;
or rather he has not Wickham’s countenance, for his features are
perfectly good. But how came you to tell us that he was so
disagreeable?”

Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could: said that she had liked
him better when they met in Kent than before, and that she had never
seen him so pleasant as this morning.

“But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,” replied
her uncle. “Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him
at his word about fishing, as he might change his mind another day, and
warn me off his grounds.”

Elizabeth felt that they had entirely mistaken his character, but said
nothing.

“From what we have seen of him,” continued Mrs. Gardiner, “I really
should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by
anybody as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look.
On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he
speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance, that would
not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the
good lady who showed us the house did give him a most flaming character!
I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal
master, I suppose, and _that_, in the eye of a servant, comprehends
every virtue.”

Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of
his behaviour to Wickham; and, therefore, gave them to understand, in as
guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from his
relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different
construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor
Wickham’s so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In
confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary
transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming
her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.

Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned: but as they were now
approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to
the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out
to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs, to think of
anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning’s walk, they had
no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former
acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an
intercourse renewed after many years’ discontinuance.

The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth
much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing
but think, and think with wonder, of Mr. Darcy’s civility, and, above
all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XLIV.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit
her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was, consequently,
resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning.
But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their own
arrival at Lambton these visitors came. They had been walking about the
place with some of their new friends, and were just returned to the inn
to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a
carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and lady in a
curricle driving up the street. Elizabeth, immediately recognizing the
livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of surprise
to her relations, by acquainting them with the honour which she
expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment
of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many
of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on
the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they now felt
that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such
a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these
newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of
Elizabeth’s feelings was every moment increasing. She was quite amazed
at her own discomposure; but, amongst other causes of disquiet, she
dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in
her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally
suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.

She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked
up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of
inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.

Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction
took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new
acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. Since her
being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud;
but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was
only exceedingly shy. She found it difficult to obtain even a word from
her beyond a monosyllable.

Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though
little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance
womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother, but there
was sense and good-humour in her face, and her manners were perfectly
unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as
acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much
relieved by discerning such different feelings.

They had not been long together before Darcy told her that Bingley was
also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her
satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley’s quick step
was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All
Elizabeth’s anger against him had been long done away; but had she still
felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected
cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. He
inquired in a friendly, though general, way, after her family, and
looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done.

To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage
than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party before
them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just
arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece, directed their observation towards
each with an earnest, though guarded, inquiry; and they soon drew from
those inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew what
it was to love. Of the lady’s sensations they remained a little in
doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was
evident enough.

Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the
feelings of each of her visitors, she wanted to compose her own, and to
make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she
feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom
she endeavoured to give pleasure were pre-possessed in her favour.
Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be
pleased.

[Illustration:

     “To make herself agreeable to all”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and oh!
how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in a
like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion
that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But,
though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his
behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. No
look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing
occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On
this point she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances
occurred ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted
a recollection of Jane, not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of
saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He
observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and
in a tone which had something of real regret, that it “was a very long
time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her;” and, before she could
reply, he added, “It is above eight months. We have not met since the
26th of November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.”

Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards
took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether
_all_ her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question,
nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which
gave them meaning.

It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself; but
whenever she did catch a glimpse she saw an expression of general
complaisance, and in all that he said, she heard an accent so far
removed from _hauteur_ or disdain of his companions, as convinced her
that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed,
however temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one
day. When she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance, and courting the
good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would
have been a disgrace; when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself,
but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected
their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage, the difference, the
change was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could
hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the
company of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations
at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from
self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could
result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the
acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed, would draw
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and
Rosings.

Their visitors stayed with them above half an hour; and when they arose
to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing
their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner
at Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a
diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations,
readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing
how _she_, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its
acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming, however,
that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of
society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for
her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.

Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth
again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to
make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all
this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased; and
on this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their
visitors left them, capable of considering the last half hour with some
satisfaction, though while it was passing the enjoyment of it had been
little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her
uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their
favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.

But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner’s curiosity; it was
not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was
much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of;
it was evident that he was very much in love with her. They saw much to
interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.

Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far
as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could
not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character
from their own feelings and his servant’s report, without any reference
to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known
would not have recognized it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest,
however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible
that the authority of a servant, who had known him since he was four
years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be
hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of
their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had
nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not,
it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market town
where the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that he
was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.

With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held
there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the
son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known
fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behind
him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.

As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than
the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not
long enough to determine her feelings towards _one_ in that mansion; and
she lay awake two whole hours, endeavouring to make them out. She
certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she
had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him,
that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his
valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some
time ceased to be repugnant to her feelings; and it was now heightened
into somewhat of a friendlier nature by the testimony so highly in his
favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light,
which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem,
there was a motive within her of good-will which could not be
overlooked. It was gratitude;--gratitude, not merely for having once
loved her, but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the
petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the
unjust accusations accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been
persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this
accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance; and
without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner,
where their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good
opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister. Such
a change in a man of so much pride excited not only astonishment but
gratitude--for to love, ardent love, it must be attributed; and, as
such, its impression on her was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no
means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined. She respected,
she esteemed, she was grateful to him, she felt a real interest in his
welfare; and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to
depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both
that she should employ the power, which her fancy told her she still
possessed, of bringing on the renewal of his addresses.

It had been settled in the evening, between the aunt and niece, that
such a striking civility as Miss Darcy’s, in coming to them on the very
day of her arrival at Pemberley--for she had reached it only to a late
breakfast--ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by
some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it
would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following
morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when
she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.

Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been
renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting
some of the gentlemen at Pemberley by noon.

[Illustration:

     “Engaged by the river”
]

CHAPTER XLV.

[Illustration]

Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley’s dislike of her had
originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how very unwelcome
her appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know
with how much civility on that lady’s side the acquaintance would now
be renewed.

On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon,
whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows,
opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody
hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts
which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.

In this room they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there
with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in
London. Georgiana’s reception of them was very civil, but attended with
all that embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the
fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves
inferior the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and
her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her.

By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a courtesy; and
on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be,
succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, a
genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind
of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the
others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from
Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she
wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a
short sentence, when there was least danger of its being heard.

Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley,
and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without
calling her attention. This observation would not have prevented her
from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an
inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity
of saying much: her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every
moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room: she wished, she
feared, that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether
she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After
sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour, without hearing Miss
Bingley’s voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold
inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal
indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.

The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the
entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the
finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many a
significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been
given, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole
party; for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the
beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches, soon collected
them round the table.

While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether
she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the
feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but
a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to
regret that he came.

He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other
gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river; and had left him
only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to
Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear, than Elizabeth wisely
resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;--a resolution the more
necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she
saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour
when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive
curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley’s, in spite of the
smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its
objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions
to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother’s
entrance, exerted herself much more to talk; and Elizabeth saw that he
was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded,
as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss
Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the
first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility,--

“Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire militia removed from Meryton?
They must be a great loss to _your_ family.”

In Darcy’s presence she dared not mention Wickham’s name: but Elizabeth
instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the
various recollections connected with him gave her a moment’s distress;
but, exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she
presently answered the question in a tolerably disengaged tone. While
she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy with a heightened
complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with
confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what
pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have
refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose
Elizabeth, by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed
her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in
Darcy’s opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies
and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected with
that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy’s
meditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy
was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley’s connections
her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from that very wish
which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming
hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan; and without
meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from Miss
Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern
for the welfare of his friend.

Elizabeth’s collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and
as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to
Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able
to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely
recollected her interest in the affair; and the very circumstance which
had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth, seemed to have
fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.

Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above
mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage,
Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth’s
person, behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her
brother’s recommendation was enough to insure her favour: his judgment
could not err; and he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth, as to leave
Georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and
amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help
repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.

“How very ill Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,” she cried: “I
never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since the winter.
She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing that we
should not have known her again.”

However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented
himself with coolly replying, that he perceived no other alteration than
her being rather tanned,--no miraculous consequence of travelling in the
summer.

“For my own part,” she rejoined, “I must confess that I never could see
any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no
brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants
character; there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are
tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which
have sometimes been called so fine, I never could perceive anything
extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not
like at all; and in her air altogether, there is a self-sufficiency
without fashion, which is intolerable.”

Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not
the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always
wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the
success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however; and, from a
determination of making him speak, she continued,--

“I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all
were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect
your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, ‘_She_
a beauty! I should as soon call her mother a wit.’ But afterwards she
seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at
one time.”

“Yes,” replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, “but _that_
was only when I first knew her; for it is many months since I have
considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.”

He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of
having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself.

Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their
visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them
both. The looks and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed,
except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked
of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit, of everything but
himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of
him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece’s
beginning the subject.

[Illustration]

Chapter XLVI.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from
Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been
renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on
the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the
receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that
it had been mis-sent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as
Jane had written the direction remarkably ill.

They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and her
uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by
themselves. The one mis-sent must be first attended to; it had been
written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of all their
little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded;
but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident
agitation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this effect:--

“Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a
most unexpected and serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you--be
assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia.
An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed,
from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she was gone off to Scotland
with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our
surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I am
very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing
to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.
Thoughtless and indiscreet I can easily believe him, but this step (and
let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His choice is
disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing.
Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How
thankful am I, that we never let them know what has been said against
him; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturday night about
twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at
eight. The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have
passed within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason to expect
him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of
their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor
mother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly
know what I have written.”

Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing
what she felt, Elizabeth, on finishing this letter, instantly seized the
other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it
had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.

“By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; I
wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my
head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest
Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you,
and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as a marriage between Mr. Wickham
and our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has
taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone
to Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton the
day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia’s short
letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to Gretna
Green, something was dropped by Denny expressing his belief that W.
never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which was repeated
to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B.,
intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Clapham, but
no farther; for on entering that place, they removed into a
hackney-coach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom.
All that is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the
London road. I know not what to think. After making every possible
inquiry on that side of London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire,
anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet
and Hatfield, but without any success,--no such people had been seen to
pass through. With the kindest concern he came on to Longbourn, and
broke his apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to his heart.
I am sincerely grieved for him and Mrs. F.; but no one can throw any
blame on them. Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and
mother believe the worst, but I cannot think so ill of him. Many
circumstances might make it more eligible for them to be married
privately in town than to pursue their first plan; and even if _he_
could form such a design against a young woman of Lydia’s connections,
which is not likely, can I suppose her so lost to everything?
Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that Colonel F. is not disposed
to depend upon their marriage: he shook his head when I expressed my
hopes, and said he feared W. was not a man to be trusted. My poor mother
is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she exert herself, it would be
better, but this is not to be expected; and as to my father, I never in
my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has anger for having concealed
their attachment; but as it was a matter of confidence, one cannot
wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared
something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is
over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am not so selfish,
however, as to press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! I take up my pen
again to do, what I have just told you I would not; but circumstances
are such, that I cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as
soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I am not
afraid of requesting it, though I have still something more to ask of
the former. My father is going to London with Colonel Forster instantly,
to try to discover her. What he means to do, I am sure I know not; but
his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any measure in the
best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton
again to-morrow evening. In such an exigence my uncle’s advice and
assistance would be everything in the world; he will immediately
comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.”

“Oh! where, where is my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat
as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing a
moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door, it was
opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face and
impetuous manner made him start, and before he could recover himself
enough to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia’s
situation, hastily exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, but I must leave you.
I must find Mr. Gardiner this moment on business that cannot be delayed;
I have not an instant to lose.”

“Good God! what is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling than
politeness; then recollecting himself, “I will not detain you a minute;
but let me, or let the servant, go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You are
not well enough; you cannot go yourself.”

Elizabeth hesitated; but her knees trembled under her, and she felt how
little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling back
the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless an
accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and
mistress home instantly.

On his quitting the room, she sat down, unable to support herself, and
looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her,
or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,
“Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give you
present relief? A glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.”

“No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to recover herself. “There
is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well, I am only distressed by
some dreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn.”

She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could
not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say
something indistinctly of his

[Illustration:

     “I have not an instant to lose”
]

concern, and observe her in compassionate silence. At length she spoke
again. “I have just had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It
cannot be concealed from anyone. My youngest sister has left all her
friends--has eloped; has thrown herself into the power of--of Mr.
Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton. _You_ know him too
well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no connections, nothing that
can tempt him to--she is lost for ever.”

Darcy was fixed in astonishment.

“When I consider,” she added, in a yet more agitated voice, “that _I_
might have prevented it! _I_ who knew what he was. Had I but explained
some part of it only--some part of what I learnt, to my own family! Had
his character been known, this could not have happened. But it is all,
all too late now.”

“I am grieved, indeed,” cried Darcy: “grieved--shocked. But is it
certain, absolutely certain?”

“Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced
almost to London, but not beyond: they are certainly not gone to
Scotland.”

“And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?”

“My father has gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle’s
immediate assistance, and we shall be off, I hope, in half an hour. But
nothing can be done; I know very well that nothing can be done. How is
such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have
not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!”

Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.

“When _my_ eyes were opened to his real character, oh! had I known what
I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not--I was afraid of doing too
much. Wretched, wretched mistake!”

Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up
and down the room in earnest meditation; his brow contracted, his air
gloomy. Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her power
was sinking; everything _must_ sink under such a proof of family
weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither
wonder nor condemn; but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing
consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. It
was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own
wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved
him, as now, when all love must be vain.

But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia--the
humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all--soon swallowed up
every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief,
Elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of
several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the
voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke
compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said,--

“I am afraid you have been long desiring my absence, nor have I anything
to plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavailing concern.
Would to Heaven that anything could be either said or done on my part,
that might offer consolation to such distress! But I will not torment
you with vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks.
This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister’s having the
pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.”

“Oh, yes! Be so kind as to apologize for us to Miss Darcy. Say that
urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as
long as it is possible. I know it cannot be long.”

He readily assured her of his secrecy, again expressed his sorrow for
her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present
reason to hope, and, leaving his compliments for her relations, with
only one serious parting look, went away.

As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they
should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had
marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a
retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of
contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those
feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would
formerly have rejoiced in its termination.

If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth’s
change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. But if
otherwise, if the regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or
unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a
first interview with its object, and even before two words have been
exchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had given
somewhat of a trial to the latter method, in her partiality for Wickham,
and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorize her to seek the other
less interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him go
with regret; and in this early example of what Lydia’s infamy must
produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched
business. Never since reading Jane’s second letter had she entertained a
hope of Wickham’s meaning to marry her. No one but Jane, she thought,
could flatter herself with such an expectation. Surprise was the least
of all her feelings on this development. While the contents of the first
letter remained on her mind, she was all surprise, all astonishment,
that Wickham should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marry
for money; and how Lydia could ever have attached him had appeared
incomprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For such an attachment
as this, she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not
suppose Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement, without the
intention of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither
her virtue nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy
prey.

She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that
Lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that Lydia had
wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes one
officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions
raised them in her opinion. Her affections had been continually
fluctuating, but never without an object. The mischief of neglect and
mistaken indulgence towards such a girl--oh! how acutely did she now
feel it!

She was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to
share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a
family so deranged; a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and
requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing
could be done for Lydia, her uncle’s interference seemed of the utmost
importance, and till he entered the room the misery of her impatience
was severe. Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing,
by the servant’s account, that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but
satisfying them instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the
cause of their summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on
the postscript of the last with trembling energy. Though Lydia had never
been a favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be
deeply affected. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after
the first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner readily
promised every assistance in his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no
less, thanked him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated
by one spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily
settled. They were to be off as soon as possible. “But what is to be
done about Pemberley?” cried Mrs. Gardiner. “John told us Mr. Darcy was
here when you sent for us;--was it so?”

“Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement.
_That_ is all settled.”

“What is all settled?” repeated the other, as she ran into her room to
prepare. “And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real
truth? Oh, that I knew how it was!”

But wishes were vain; or, at best, could serve only to amuse her in the
hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure
to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was
impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of
business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to
be written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their
sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr.
Gardiner, meanwhile, having settled his account at the inn, nothing
remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of
the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could
have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.

[Illustration:

     “The first pleasing earnest of their welcome”
]

CHAPTER XLVII.

[Illustration]

“I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle, as they
drove from the town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am much
more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does of the
matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should form
such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or
friendless, and who was actually staying in his Colonel’s family, that I
am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends
would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the
regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His temptation is
not adequate to the risk.”

“Do you really think so?” cried Elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.

“Upon my word,” said Mrs. Gardiner, “I begin to be of your uncle’s
opinion. It is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and
interest, for him to be guilty of it. I cannot think so very ill of
Wickham. Can you, yourself, Lizzie, so wholly give him up, as to believe
him capable of it?”

“Not perhaps of neglecting his own interest. But of every other neglect
I can believe him capable. If, indeed, it should be so! But I dare not
hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland, if that had been the
case?”

“In the first place,” replied Mr. Gardiner, “there is no absolute proof
that they are not gone to Scotland.”

“Oh, but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such a
presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the
Barnet road.”

“Well, then,--supposing them to be in London--they may be there, though
for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptionable purpose. It is
not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it
might strike them that they could be more economically, though less
expeditiously, married in London, than in Scotland.”

“But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must their
marriage be private? Oh, no, no--this is not likely. His most particular
friend, you see by Jane’s account, was persuaded of his never intending
to marry her. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. He
cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia, what attractions has she
beyond youth, health, and good humour, that could make him for her sake
forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well? As to what
restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a
dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I know
nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But as to your
other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has no
brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father’s
behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever
seemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that _he_ would
do as little and think as little about it, as any father could do, in
such a matter.”

“But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything but love of him,
as to consent to live with him on any other terms than marriage?”

“It does seem, and it is most shocking, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, with
tears in her eyes, “that a sister’s sense of decency and virtue in such
a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say.
Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young: she has never
been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half year,
nay, for a twelvemonth, she has been given up to nothing but amusement
and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle
and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way.
Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,
flirtation, and officers, have been in her head. She has been doing
everything in her power, by thinking and talking on the subject, to give
greater--what shall I call it?--susceptibility to her feelings; which
are naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every
charm of person and address that can captivate a woman.”

“But you see that Jane,” said her aunt, “does not think so ill of
Wickham, as to believe him capable of the attempt.”

“Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be
their former conduct, that she would believe capable of such an attempt,
till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what
Wickham really is. We both know that he has been profligate in every
sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is
as false and deceitful as he is insinuating.”

“And do you really know all this?” cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose curiosity
as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.

“I do, indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. “I told you the other day
of his infamous behaviour to Mr. Darcy; and you, yourself, when last at
Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved with
such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other
circumstances which I am not at liberty--which it is not worth while to
relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. From
what he said of Miss Darcy, I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud,
reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He
must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found
her.”

“But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what you
and Jane seem so well to understand?”

“Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw
so much both of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was
ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home the ----shire
was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight’s time. As that was the
case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it
necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could it
apparently be to anyone, that the good opinion, which all the
neighbourhood had of him, should then be overthrown? And even when it
was settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of
opening her eyes to his character never occurred to me. That _she_ could
be in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such a
consequence as _this_ should ensue, you may easily believe was far
enough from my thoughts.”

“When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, I
suppose, to believe them fond of each other?”

“Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on either
side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware
that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When first
he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all
were. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him for
the first two months: but he never distinguished _her_ by any particular
attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and
wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment,
who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.”

It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added
to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject by
its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during
the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth’s thoughts it was never absent.
Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could
find no interval of ease or forgetfulness.

They travelled as expeditiously as possible; and sleeping one night on
the road, reached Longbourn by dinnertime the next day. It was a comfort
to Elizabeth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied by long
expectations.

The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing
on the steps of the house, as they entered the paddock; and when the
carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their
faces and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of
capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.

Elizabeth jumped out; and after giving each of them a hasty kiss,
hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running downstairs from
her mother’s apartment, immediately met her.

Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the
eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been
heard of the fugitives.

“Not yet,” replied Jane. “But now that my dear uncle is come, I hope
everything will be well.”

“Is my father in town?”

“Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.”

“And have you heard from him often?”

“We have heard only once. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday, to say
that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I
particularly begged him to do. He merely added, that he should not write
again, till he had something of importance to mention.”

“And my mother--how is she? How are you all?”

“My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly
shaken. She is upstairs, and will have great satisfaction in seeing you
all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank
Heaven! are quite well.”

“But you--how are you?” cried Elizabeth. “You look pale. How much you
must have gone through!”

Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their
conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were
engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach of
the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and
thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.

When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth
had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon
found that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of good,
however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested, had not yet
deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that
every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father,
to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce the marriage.

Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes’
conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with
tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous
conduct of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage;
blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the
errors of her daughter must be principally owing.

“If I had been able,” said she, “to carry my point in going to Brighton
with all my family, _this_ would not have happened: but poor dear Lydia
had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out
of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their
side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing, if she had
been well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have
the charge of her; but I was over-ruled, as I always am. Poor, dear
child! And now here’s Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight
Wickham, wherever he meets him, and then he will be killed, and what is
to become of us all? The Collinses will turn us out, before he is cold
in his grave; and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what
we shall do.”

They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and Mr. Gardiner, after
general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told her
that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr.
Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia.

“Do not give way to useless alarm,” added he: “though it is right to be
prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain.
It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more, we
may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married,
and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as
lost. As soon as I get to town, I shall go to my brother, and make him
come home with me to Gracechurch Street, and then we may consult
together as to what is to be done.”

“Oh, my dear brother,” replied Mrs. Bennet, “that is exactly what I
could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out,
wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ them
marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but
tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them,
after they are married. And, above all things, keep Mr. Bennet from
fighting. Tell him what a dreadful state I am in--that I am frightened
out of my wits; and have such tremblings, such flutterings all over me,
such spasms in my side, and pains in my head, and such beatings at my
heart, that I can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear
Lydia not to give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me,
for she does not know which are the best warehouses. Oh, brother, how
kind you are! I know you will contrive it all.”

But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours
in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well in
her hopes as her fears; and after talking with her in this manner till
dinner was on table, they left her to vent all her feelings on the
housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters.

Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real
occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to
oppose it; for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her
tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it
better that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they could
most trust, should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the
subject.

In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been
too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance
before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The
faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible
in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger
which she had herself incurred in the business, had given something more
of fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was
mistress enough of herself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance
of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table,--

“This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of.
But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of
each other the balm of sisterly consolation.”

Then perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added,
“Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful
lesson:--that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable, that one
false step involves her in endless ruin, that her reputation is no less
brittle than it is beautiful, and that she cannot be too much guarded in
her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.”

Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to
make any reply. Mary, however, continued to console herself with such
kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.

In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for half an
hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of the
opportunity of making any inquiries which Jane was equally eager to
satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel
of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss
Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued
the subject by saying, “But tell me all and everything about it which I
have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did Colonel
Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement
took place? They must have seen them together for ever.”

“Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality,
especially on Lydia’s side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am so
grieved for him. His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He
_was_ coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had
any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension
first got abroad, it hastened his journey.”

“And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did he know of
their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?”

“Yes; but when questioned by _him_, Denny denied knowing anything of
their plan, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not
repeat his persuasion of their not marrying, and from _that_ I am
inclined to hope he might have been misunderstood before.”

“And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of you entertained a
doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?”

“How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt a
little uneasy--a little fearful of my sister’s happiness with him in
marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite
right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how
imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural
triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia’s last letter
she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their
being in love with each other many weeks.”

“But not before they went to Brighton?”

“No, I believe not.”

“And did Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wickham himself? Does he
know his real character?”

“I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly
did. He believed him to be imprudent and extravagant; and since this sad
affair has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly in debt:
but I hope this may be false.”

“Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him,
this could not have happened!”

“Perhaps it would have been better,” replied her sister.

“But to expose the former faults of any person, without knowing what
their present feelings were, seemed unjustifiable.”

“We acted with the best intentions.”

“Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia’s note to his
wife?”

“He brought it with him for us to see.”

Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These
were the contents:--

     /* NIND “My dear Harriet, */

     “You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help
     laughing myself at your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am
     missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with
     who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the
     world I love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without
     him, so think it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at
     Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the
     surprise the greater when I write to them, and sign my name Lydia
     Wickham. What a good joke it will be! I can hardly write for
     laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for not keeping my
     engagement, and dancing with him to-night. Tell him I hope he will
     excuse me when he knows all, and tell him I will dance with him at
     the next ball we meet with great pleasure. I shall send for my
     clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell Sally to
     mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are packed
     up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will
     drink to our good journey.

“Your affectionate friend,

“LYDIA BENNET.”

“Oh, thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!” cried Elizabeth when she had
finished it. “What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment! But
at least it shows that _she_ was serious in the object of her journey.
Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her side a
_scheme_ of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!”

“I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten
minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in
such confusion!”

“Oh, Jane,” cried Elizabeth, “was there a servant belonging to it who
did not know the whole story before the end of the day?”

“I do not know: I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is
very difficult. My mother was in hysterics; and though I endeavoured to
give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so much
as I might have done. But the horror of what might possibly happen
almost took from me my faculties.”

“Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look
well. Oh that I had been with you! you have had every care and anxiety
upon yourself alone.”

“Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every
fatigue, I am sure, but I did not think it right for either of them.
Kitty is slight and delicate, and Mary studies so much that her hours of
repose should not be broken in on. My aunt Philips came to Longbourn on
Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till
Thursday with me. She was of great use and comfort to us all, and Lady
Lucas has been very kind: she walked here on Wednesday morning to
condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters, if
they could be of use to us.”

“She had better have stayed at home,” cried Elizabeth: “perhaps she
_meant_ well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too
little of one’s neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence,
insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.”

She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had
intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.

“He meant, I believe,” replied Jane, “to go to Epsom, the place where
they last changed horses, see the postilions, and try if anything could
be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the
number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had come
with a fare from London; and as he thought the circumstance of a
gentleman and lady’s removing from one carriage into another might be
remarked, he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow
discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he
determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible
to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any
other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone,
and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding
out even so much as this.”

[Illustration:

     The Post
]

CHAPTER XLVIII.

[Illustration]

The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next
morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him.
His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and
dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion.
They were forced to conclude, that he had no pleasing intelligence to
send; but even of _that_ they would have been glad to be certain. Mr.
Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.

When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant
information of what was going on; and their uncle promised, at parting,
to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn as soon as he could, to
the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only
security for her husband’s not being killed in a duel.

Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few
days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable to
her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a
great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also
visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of
cheering and heartening them up--though, as she never came without
reporting some fresh instance of Wickham’s extravagance or irregularity,
she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found
them.

All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months
before, had been almost an angel of light. He was declared to be in debt
to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with
the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman’s family.
Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world; and
everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the
appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above
half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of
her sister’s ruin still more certain; and even Jane, who believed still
less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now
come, when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before
entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some
news of them.

Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday, his wife received a
letter from him: it told them, that on his arrival he had immediately
found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street.
That Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival, but
without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now
determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet
thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first
coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself
did not expect any success from this measure; but as his brother was
eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added, that Mr.
Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London, and
promised to write again very soon. There was also a postscript to this
effect:--

“I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if
possible, from some of the young man’s intimates in the regiment,
whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to
know in what part of the town he has now concealed himself. If there
were anyone that one could apply to, with a probability of gaining such
a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present we have
nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in
his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps
Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living better than any
other person.”

Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference for
her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any
information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved.

She had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father
and mother, both of whom had been dead many years. It was possible,
however, that some of his companions in the ----shire might be able to
give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in expecting
it, the application was a something to look forward to.

Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious
part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival of letters was
the first grand object of every morning’s impatience. Through letters,
whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated; and every
succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.

But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for
their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane
had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence,
she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his
letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as
follows:--

     /* “My dear Sir, */

     “I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation
     in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now
     suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter
     from Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and
     myself sincerely sympathize with you, and all your respectable
     family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest
     kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No
     arguments shall be wanting on my part, that can alleviate so severe
     a misfortune; or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that
     must be, of all others, most afflicting to a parent’s mind. The
     death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of
     this. And it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to
     suppose, as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness
     of behaviour in your

     [Illustration:

“To whom I have related the affair”

     [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

     daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though,
     at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet,
     I am inclined to think that her own disposition must be naturally
     bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an
     age. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to be pitied; in
     which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by
     Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have related the affair.
     They agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one
     daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others: for
     who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect
     themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads me,
     moreover, to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain
     event of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been
     involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me advise you, then,
     my dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off
     your unworthy child from your affection for ever, and leave her to
     reap the fruits of her own heinous offence.

“I am, dear sir,” etc., etc.

Mr. Gardiner did not write again, till he had received an answer from
Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send.
It was not known that Wickham had a single relation with whom he kept up
any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living. His
former acquaintance had been numerous; but since he had been in the
militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship
with any of them. There was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out
as likely to give any news of him. And in the wretched state of his own
finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to
his fear of discovery by Lydia’s relations; for it had just transpired
that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount.
Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be
necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton. He owed a good deal in the
town, but his debts of honour were still more formidable. Mr. Gardiner
did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family;
Jane heard them with horror. “A gamester!” she cried. “This is wholly
unexpected; I had not an idea of it.”

Mr. Gardiner added, in his letter, that they might expect to see their
father at home on the following day, which was Saturday. Rendered
spiritless by the ill success of all their endeavours, he had yielded to
his brother-in-law’s entreaty that he would return to his family and
leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable
for continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did
not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering
what her anxiety for his life had been before.

“What! is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?” she cried. “Sure he
will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham,
and make him marry her, if he comes away?”

As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she
and her children should go to London at the same time that Mr. Bennet
came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their
journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn.

Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her
Derbyshire friend, that had attended her from that part of the world.
His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece;
and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of
their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing.
Elizabeth had received none since her return, that could come from
Pemberley.

The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for
the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be
fairly conjectured from _that_,--though Elizabeth, who was by this time
tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware
that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of
Lydia’s infamy somewhat better. It would have spared her, she thought,
one sleepless night out of two.

When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual
philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the
habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him
away; and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of
it.

It was not till the afternoon, when he joined them at tea, that
Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly
expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, “Say
nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing,
and I ought to feel it.”

“You must not be too severe upon yourself,” replied Elizabeth.

“You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone to
fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have
been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression.
It will pass away soon enough.”

“Do you suppose them to be in London?”

“Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?”

“And Lydia used to want to go to London,” added Kitty.

“She is happy, then,” said her father, drily; “and her residence there
will probably be of some duration.”

Then, after a short silence, he continued, “Lizzy, I bear you no
ill-will for being justified in your advice to me last May, which,
considering the event, shows some greatness of mind.”

They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother’s
tea.

“This is a parade,” cried he, “which does one good; it gives such an
elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my
library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as
I can,--or perhaps I may defer it till Kitty runs away.”

“I am not going to run away, papa,” said Kitty, fretfully. “If _I_
should ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than Lydia.”

“_You_ go to Brighton! I would not trust you so near it as Eastbourne,
for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at least learnt to be cautious, and
you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter my house
again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be absolutely
prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters. And you are
never to stir out of doors, till you can prove that you have spent ten
minutes of every day in a rational manner.”

Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.

“Well, well,” said he, “do not make yourself unhappy. If you are a good
girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of
them.”

[Illustration]

CHAPTER XLIX.

[Illustration]

Two days after Mr. Bennet’s return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking
together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper
coming towards them, and concluding that she came to call them to their
mother, went forward to meet her; but instead of the expected summons,
when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, “I beg your pardon,
madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have got some
good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask.”

“What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town.”

“Dear madam,” cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, “don’t you know
there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here
this half hour, and master has had a letter.”

Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They
ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the
library;--their father was in neither; and they were on the point of
seeking him upstairs with their mother, when they were met by the
butler, who said,--

“If you are looking for my master, ma’am, he is walking towards the
little copse.”

Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once more,
and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately
pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.

Jane, who was not so light, nor so much in the habit of running as
Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath,
came up with him, and eagerly cried out,--

“Oh, papa, what news? what news? have you heard from my uncle?”

“Yes, I have had a letter from him by express.”

“Well, and what news does it bring--good or bad?”

“What is there of good to be expected?” said he, taking the letter from
his pocket; “but perhaps you would like to read it.”

Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up.

“Read it aloud,” said their father, “for I hardly know myself what it is
about.”

     /* RIGHT “Gracechurch Street, _Monday, August 2_. */

“My dear Brother,

     “At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such
     as, upon the whole, I hope will give you satisfaction. Soon after
     you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what
     part of London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet.
     It is enough to know they are discovered: I have seen them
     both----”

     [Illustration:

“But perhaps you would like to read it”

     [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

     “Then it is as I always hoped,” cried Jane: “they are married!”

     Elizabeth read on: “I have seen them both. They are not married,
     nor can I find there was any intention of being so; but if you are
     willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on
     your side, I hope it will not be long before they are. All that is
     required of you is, to assure to your daughter, by settlement, her
     equal share of the five thousand pounds, secured among your
     children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and,
     moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her, during your
     life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions which,
     considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as
     far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall send this by
     express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You
     will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham’s
     circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to
     be. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to
     say, there will be some little money, even when all his debts are
     discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune.
     If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act
     in your name throughout the whole of this business, I will
     immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper
     settlement. There will not be the smallest occasion for your coming
     to town again; therefore stay quietly at Longbourn, and depend on
     my diligence and care. Send back your answer as soon as you can,
     and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it best that my
     niece should be married from this house, of which I hope you will
     approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as
     anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.

“EDW. GARDINER.”

“Is it possible?” cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. “Can it be
possible that he will marry her?”

“Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we have thought him,” said her
sister. “My dear father, I congratulate you.”

“And have you answered the letter?” said Elizabeth.

“No; but it must be done soon.”

Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he
wrote.

“Oh! my dear father,” she cried, “come back and write immediately.
Consider how important every moment is in such a case.”

“Let me write for you,” said Jane, “if you dislike the trouble
yourself.”

“I dislike it very much,” he replied; “but it must be done.”

And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.

“And--may I ask?” said Elizabeth; “but the terms, I suppose, must be
complied with.”

“Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little.”

“And they _must_ marry! Yet he is _such_ a man.”

“Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there
are two things that I want very much to know:--one is, how much money
your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how I am ever
to pay him.”

“Money! my uncle!” cried Jane, “what do you mean, sir?”

“I mean that no man in his proper senses would marry Lydia on so slight
a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after I am
gone.”

“That is very true,” said Elizabeth; “though it had not occurred to me
before. His debts to be discharged, and something still to remain! Oh,
it must be my uncle’s doings! Generous, good man, I am afraid he has
distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this.”

“No,” said her father. “Wickham’s a fool if he takes her with a farthing
less than ten thousand pounds: I should be sorry to think so ill of him,
in the very beginning of our relationship.”

“Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be
repaid?”

Mr. Bennet made no answer; and each of them, deep in thought, continued
silent till they reached the house. Their father then went to the
library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.

“And they are really to be married!” cried Elizabeth, as soon as they
were by themselves. “How strange this is! and for _this_ we are to be
thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness,
and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice! Oh, Lydia!”

“I comfort myself with thinking,” replied Jane, “that he certainly would
not marry Lydia, if he had not a real regard for her. Though our kind
uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten
thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children
of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand
pounds?”

“If we are ever able to learn what Wickham’s debts have been,” said
Elizabeth, “and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall
exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has
not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be
requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal
protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as
years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she is
actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now,
she will never deserve to be happy! What a meeting for her, when she
first sees my aunt!”

“We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,” said
Jane: “I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to marry
her is a proof, I will believe, that he is come to a right way of
thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself
they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in
time make their past imprudence forgotten.”

“Their conduct has been such,” replied Elizabeth, “as neither you, nor
I, nor anybody, can ever forget. It is useless to talk of it.”

It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood
perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to the library,
therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to make
it known to her. He was writing, and, without raising his head, coolly
replied,--

“Just as you please.”

“May we take my uncle’s letter to read to her?”

“Take whatever you like, and get away.”

Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went upstairs
together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication
would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news,
the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As
soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner’s hope of Lydia’s being soon married,
her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its
exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight as she
had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter
would be married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her
felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.

“My dear, dear Lydia!” she cried: “this is delightful indeed! She will
be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at sixteen! My
good, kind brother! I knew how it would be--I knew he would manage
everything. How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the
clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about
them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how
much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell,
Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear
Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!”

Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of
these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Mr.
Gardiner’s behaviour laid them all under.

“For we must attribute this happy conclusion,” she added, “in a great
measure to his kindness. We are persuaded that he has pledged himself to
assist Mr. Wickham with money.”

“Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right; who should do it but
her own uncle? If he had not had a family of his own, I and my children
must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have
ever had anything from him except a few presents. Well! I am so happy.
In a short time, I shall have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well
it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am in
such a flutter, that I am sure I can’t write; so I will dictate, and you
write for me. We will settle with your father about the money
afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”

She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and
cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had
not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her
father was at leisure to be consulted. One day’s delay, she observed,
would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite
so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head.

“I will go to Meryton,” said she, “as soon as I am dressed, and tell the
good, good news to my sister Philips. And as I come back, I can call on
Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage. An
airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do
anything for you in Meryton? Oh! here comes Hill. My dear Hill, have you
heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall
all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding.”

Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received her
congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took
refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom. Poor Lydia’s
situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she
had need to be thankful. She felt it so; and though, in looking forward,
neither rational happiness, nor worldly prosperity could be justly
expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had feared, only
two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had gained.

[Illustration:

“The spiteful old ladies”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER L.

[Illustration]

Mr. Bennet had very often wished, before this period of his life, that,
instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum, for
the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived
him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that
respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of
honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of
prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to
be her husband might then have rested in its proper place.

He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone
should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law; and he
was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance,
and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.

When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly
useless; for, of course, they were to have a son. This son was to join
in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow
and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five daughters
successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs.
Bennet, for many years after Lydia’s birth, had been certain that he
would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then too
late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy; and her
husband’s love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their
income.

Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and
the children. But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the
latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one point, with
regard to Lydia at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet
could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In
terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though
expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect
approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the
engagements that had been made for him. He had never before supposed
that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would be
done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present
arrangement. He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser, by the
hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket
allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her
through her mother’s hands, Lydia’s expenses had been very little within
that sum.

That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was
another very welcome surprise; for his chief wish at present was to have
as little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports
of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he
naturally returned to all his former indolence. His letter was soon
despatched; for though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in
its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he was
indebted to his brother; but was too angry with Lydia to send any
message to her.

The good news quickly spread through the house; and with proportionate
speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent
philosophy. To be sure, it would have been more for the advantage of
conversation, had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the
happiest alternative, been secluded from the world in some distant
farm-house. But there was much to be talked of, in marrying her; and the
good-natured wishes for her well-doing, which had proceeded before from
all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton, lost but little of their spirit
in this change of circumstances, because with such a husband her misery
was considered certain.

It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been down stairs, but on this
happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in
spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to her
triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object of
her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of
accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those
attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and
servants. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a
proper situation for her daughter; and, without knowing or considering
what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and
importance.

“Haye Park might do,” said she, “if the Gouldings would quit it, or the
great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is
too far off. I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for
Purvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.”

Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the
servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her, “Mrs.
Bennet, before you take any, or all of these houses, for your son and
daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into _one_ house in this
neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the
imprudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn.”

A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm: it
soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror,
that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his
daughter. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of
affection whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend
it. That his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable
resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege, without which her
marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all that she could believe
possible. She was more alive to the disgrace, which her want of new
clothes must reflect on her daughter’s nuptials, than to any sense of
shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they
took place.

Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of
the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for
her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper
termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its
unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the
spot.

She had no fear of its spreading farther, through his means. There were
few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended;
but at the same time there was no one whose knowledge of a sister’s
frailty would have mortified her so much. Not, however, from any fear of
disadvantage from it individually to herself; for at any rate there
seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia’s marriage been
concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family, where to every other
objection would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest
kind with the man whom he so justly scorned.

From such a connection she could not wonder that he should shrink. The
wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his
feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a
blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she
hardly knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no
longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there
seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She was convinced that
she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they
should meet.

What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the
proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago would now
have been gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous, she
doubted not, as the most generous of his sex. But while he was mortal,
there must be a triumph.

She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in
disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and
temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It
was an union that must have been to the advantage of both: by her ease
and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved;
and from his judgment, information, and knowledge of the world, she must
have received benefit of greater importance.

But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what
connubial felicity really was. An union of a different tendency, and
precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their
family.

How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence she
could not imagine. But how little of permanent happiness could belong to
a couple who were only brought together because their passions were
stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture.

Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet’s
acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurances of his eagerness to
promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties
that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal
purport of his letter was to inform them, that Mr. Wickham had resolved
on quitting the militia.

“It was greatly my wish that he should do so,” he added, “as soon as his
marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in
considering a removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his
account and my niece’s. It is Mr. Wickham’s intention to go into the
Regulars; and, among his former friends, there are still some who are
able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of an
ensigncy in General----’s regiment, now quartered in the north. It is
an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He
promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each
have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have
written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements,
and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. Wickham
in and near Brighton with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have
pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying
similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin
a list, according to his information? He has given in all his debts; I
hope at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and
all will be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment,
unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs.
Gardiner that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she
leaves the south. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to
you and her mother.--Yours, etc.

“E. GARDINER.”

Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham’s
removal from the ----shire, as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But
Mrs. Bennet was not so well pleased with it. Lydia’s being settled in
the north, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her
company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in
Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a
pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted
with everybody, and had so many favourites.

“She is so fond of Mrs. Forster,” said she, “it will be quite shocking
to send her away! And there are several of the young men, too, that she
likes very much. The officers may not be so pleasant in General----’s
regiment.”

His daughter’s request, for such it might be considered, of being
admitted into her family again, before she set off for the north,
received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who
agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister’s feelings and
consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents,
urged him so earnestly, yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her
and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was
prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their
mother had the satisfaction of knowing, that she should be able to show
her married daughter in the neighbourhood, before she was banished to
the north. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he
sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that, as soon
as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth
was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme;
and, had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him
would have been the last object of her wishes.

[Illustration:

“With an affectionate smile”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER LI.

[Illustration]

Their sister’s wedding-day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her
probably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to meet
them at----, and they were to return in it by dinnertime. Their arrival
was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets--and Jane more especially, who
gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had _she_
been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister
must endure.

They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast-room to receive
them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet, as the carriage drove up to
the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed,
anxious, uneasy.

Lydia’s voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and
she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and
welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand with an affectionate smile to
Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy, with an
alacrity which showed no doubt of their happiness.

Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite
so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely
opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was
enough to provoke him.

Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was
Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She turned
from sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at
length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of
some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it was a
great while since she had been there.

Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself; but his manners
were always so pleasing, that, had his character and his marriage been
exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he
claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth
had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat
down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the
impudence of an impudent man. _She_ blushed, and Jane blushed; but the
cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of
colour.

There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither
of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near
Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood,
with a good-humoured ease, which she felt very unable to equal in her
replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the
world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led
voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for
the world.

“Only think of its being three months,” she cried, “since I went away:
it seems but a fortnight, I declare; and yet there have been things
enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am sure
I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! though I
thought it would be very good fun if I was.”

Her father lifted up his eyes, Jane was distressed, Elizabeth looked
expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of
which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued,--

“Oh, mamma, do the people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was
afraid they might not; and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle,
so I was determined he should know it, and so I let down the side glass
next to him, and took off my glove and let my hand just rest upon the
window frame, so that he might see the ring, and then I bowed and
smiled like anything.”

Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up and ran out of the room;
and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to
the dining-parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with
anxious parade, walk up to her mother’s right hand, and hear her say to
her eldest sister,--

“Ah, Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a
married woman.”

It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment
from which she had been so wholly free at first. Her ease and good
spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Philips, the Lucases, and all
their other neighbours, and to hear herself called “Mrs. Wickham” by
each of them; and in the meantime she went after dinner to show her ring
and boast of being married to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.

“Well, mamma,” said she, when they were all returned to the
breakfast-room, “and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a
charming man? I am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they
may have half my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the
place to get husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go!”

“Very true; and if I had my will we should. But, my dear Lydia, I don’t
at all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?”

“Oh, Lord! yes; there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all things.
You and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We shall be at
Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some balls, and I
will take care to get good partners for them all.”

“I should like it beyond anything!” said her mother.

“And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters
behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the
winter is over.”

“I thank you for my share of the favour,” said Elizabeth; “but I do not
particularly like your way of getting husbands.”

Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham
had received his commission before he left London, and he was to join
his regiment at the end of a fortnight.

No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and
she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and
having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to
all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did
think than such as did not.

Wickham’s affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected to
find it; not equal to Lydia’s for him. She had scarcely needed her
present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that
their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love rather
than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring
for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain
that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and
if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity
of having a companion.

Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every
occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him. He did
everything best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds
on the first of September than anybody else in the country.

One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two
elder sisters, she said to Elizabeth,--

“Lizzy, I never gave _you_ an account of my wedding, I believe. You were
not by, when I told mamma, and the others, all about it. Are not you
curious to hear how it was managed?”

“No, really,” replied Elizabeth; “I think there cannot be too little
said on the subject.”

“La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We were
married, you know, at St. Clement’s, because Wickham’s lodgings were in
that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven
o’clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others
were to meet us at the church.

“Well, Monday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! I was so afraid,
you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I should
have gone quite distracted. And there was my aunt, all the time I was
dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a
sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in ten, for I was
thinking, you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I longed to know whether
he would be married in his blue coat.

“Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual: I thought it would never
be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand that my uncle and aunt
were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you’ll believe
me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a
fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything! To be sure, London was
rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open.

“Well, and so, just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was
called away upon business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you
know, when once they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so
frightened I did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away;
and if we were beyond the hour we could not be married all day. But,
luckily, he came back again in ten minutes’ time, and then we all set
out. However, I recollected afterwards, that if he _had_ been prevented
going, the wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have done as
well.”

“Mr. Darcy!” repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement.

“Oh, yes! he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But, gracious me!
I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised
them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!”

“If it was to be a secret,” said Jane, “say not another word on the
subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.”

“Oh, certainly,” said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; “we will
ask you no questions.”

“Thank you,” said Lydia; “for if you did, I should certainly tell you
all, and then Wickham would be so angry.”

On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her
power, by running away.

But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it
was impossible not to try for information. Mr. Darcy had been at her
sister’s wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people,
where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go.
Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her
brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as
placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She
could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper,
wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what
Lydia had dropped, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been
intended.

“You may readily comprehend,” she added, “what my curiosity must be to
know how a person unconnected with any of us, and, comparatively
speaking, a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such
a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it--unless it is,
for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to
think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with
ignorance.”

“Not that I _shall_, though,” she added to herself, and she finished the
letter; “and, my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable
manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it
out.”

Jane’s delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to
Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of
it:--till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any
satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.

[Illustration:

“I am sure she did not listen.”
]

CHAPTER LII.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as
soon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in possession of it, than
hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to be
interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches, and prepared to be
happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not
contain a denial.

     /* RIGHT “Gracechurch Street, _Sept. 6_. */

“My dear Niece,

     “I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole
     morning to answering it, as I foresee that a _little_ writing will
     not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself
     surprised by your application; I did not expect it from _you_.
     Don’t think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you know,
     that I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on _your_
     side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive my
     impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am; and nothing
     but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed
     him to act as he has done. But if you are really innocent and
     ignorant, I must be more explicit. On the very day of my coming
     home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor. Mr.
     Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours. It was all
     over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked
     as _yours_ seems to have been. He came to tell Mr. Gardiner that he
     had found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were, and that he
     had seen and talked with them both--Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once.
     From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only one day after
     ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for
     them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to
     himself that Wickham’s worthlessness had not been so well known as
     to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or
     confide in him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken
     pride, and confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to
     lay his private actions open to the world. His character was to
     speak for itself. He called it, therefore, his duty to step
     forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on
     by himself. If he _had another_ motive, I am sure it would never
     disgrace him. He had been some days in town before he was able to
     discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which was
     more than _we_ had; and the consciousness of this was another
     reason for his resolving to follow us. There is a lady, it seems, a
     Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was
     dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation, though
     he did not say what. She then took a large house in Edward Street,
     and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings. This Mrs.
     Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; and he
     went to her for intelligence of him, as soon as he got to town. But
     it was two or three days before he could get from her what he
     wanted. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery
     and corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be
     found. Wickham, indeed, had gone to her on their first arrival in
     London; and had she been able to receive them into her house, they
     would have taken up their abode with her. At length, however, our
     kind friend procured the wished-for direction. They were in ----
     Street. He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia.
     His first object with her, he acknowledged, had been to persuade
     her to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her
     friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her,
     offering his assistance as far as it would go. But he found Lydia
     absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared for none
     of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear of
     leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be married some time or
     other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her
     feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a
     marriage, which, in his very first conversation with Wickham, he
     easily learnt had never been _his_ design. He confessed himself
     obliged to leave the regiment on account of some debts of honour
     which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all the ill
     consequences of Lydia’s flight on her own folly alone. He meant to
     resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation,
     he could conjecture very little about it. He must go somewhere, but
     he did not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live
     on. Mr. Darcy asked why he did not marry your sister at once.
     Though Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have
     been able to do something for him, and his situation must have been
     benefited by marriage. But he found, in reply to this question,
     that Wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making
     his fortune by marriage, in some other country. Under such
     circumstances, however, he was not likely to be proof against the
     temptation of immediate relief. They met several times, for there
     was much to be discussed. Wickham, of course, wanted more than he
     could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable. Everything
     being settled between _them_, Mr. Darcy’s next step was to make
     your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Gracechurch
     Street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner could not
     be seen; and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father
     was still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did
     not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly
     consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him
     till after the departure of the former. He did not leave his name,
     and till the next day it was only known that a gentleman had called
     on business. On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your
     uncle at home, and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk
     together. They met again on Sunday, and then _I_ saw him too. It
     was not all settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express
     was sent off to Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I
     fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of his character,
     after all. He has been accused of many faults at different times;
     but _this_ is the true one. Nothing was to be done that he did not
     do himself; though I am sure (and I do not speak it to be thanked,
     therefore say nothing about it) your uncle would most readily have
     settled the whole. They battled it together for a long time, which
     was more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it
     deserved. But at last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead
     of being allowed to be of use to his niece, was forced to put up
     with only having the probable credit of it, which went sorely
     against the grain; and I really believe your letter this morning
     gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that
     would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where
     it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no further than yourself, or
     Jane at most. You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done
     for the young people. His debts are to be paid, amounting, I
     believe, to considerably more than a thousand pounds, another
     thousand in addition to her own settled upon _her_, and his
     commission purchased. The reason why all this was to be done by him
     alone, was such as I have given above. It was owing to him, to his
     reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham’s character
     had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had been
     received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth in
     _this_; though I doubt whether _his_ reserve, or _anybody’s_
     reserve can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this
     fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that
     your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him credit
     for _another interest_ in the affair. When all this was resolved
     on, he returned again to his friends, who were still staying at
     Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in London once more
     when the wedding took place, and all money matters were then to
     receive the last finish. I believe I have now told you everything.
     It is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I
     hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to
     us, and Wickham had constant admission to the house. _He_ was
     exactly what he had been when I knew him in Hertfordshire; but I
     would not tell you how little I was satisfied with _her_ behaviour
     while she stayed with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane’s letter
     last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a
     piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no
     fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner,
     representing to her the wickedness of what she had done, and all
     the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she heard me, it
     was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was sometimes
     quite provoked; but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane,
     and for their sakes had patience with her. Mr. Darcy was punctual
     in his return, and, as Lydia informed you, attended the wedding. He
     dined with us the next day, and was to leave town again on
     Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry with me, my dear
     Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold
     enough to say before) how much I like him? His behaviour to us has,
     in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire.
     His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but
     a little more liveliness, and _that_, if he marry _prudently_, his
     wife may teach him. I thought him very sly; he hardly ever
     mentioned your name. But slyness seems the fashion. Pray forgive
     me, if I have been very presuming, or at least do not punish me so
     far as to exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy till I
     have been all round the park. A low phaeton with a nice little pair
     of ponies would be the very thing. But I must write no more. The
     children have been wanting me this half hour.

“Yours, very sincerely,

“M. GARDINER.”

The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits,
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the
greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had
produced, of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her
sister’s match--which she had feared to encourage, as an exertion of
goodness too great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be
just, from the pain of obligation--were proved beyond their greatest
extent to be true! He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken
on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a
research; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he
must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently
meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe the man whom he always
most wished to avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to
pronounce. He had done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard
nor esteem. Her heart did whisper that he had done it for her. But it
was a hope shortly checked by other considerations; and she soon felt
that even her vanity was insufficient, when required to depend on his
affection for her, for a woman who had already refused him, as able to
overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with
Wickham. Brother-in-law of Wickham! Every kind of pride must revolt from
the connection. He had, to be sure, done much. She was ashamed to think
how much. But he had given a reason for his interference, which asked no
extraordinary stretch of belief. It was reasonable that he should feel
he had been wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising
it; and though she would not place herself as his principal inducement,
she could perhaps believe, that remaining partiality for her might
assist his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be
materially concerned. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that
they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a
return. They owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, everything to
him. Oh, how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she
had ever encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards
him! For herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him,--proud that
in a cause of compassion and honour he had been able to get the better
of himself. She read over her aunt’s commendation of him again and
again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even sensible
of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly
both she and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence
subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself.

She was roused from her seat and her reflections, by someone’s approach;
and, before she could strike into another path, she was overtaken by
Wickham.

“I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?” said he,
as he joined her.

“You certainly do,” she replied with a smile; “but it does not follow
that the interruption must be unwelcome.”

“I should be sorry, indeed, if it were. _We_ were always good friends,
and now we are better.”

“True. Are the others coming out?”

“I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to
Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I find, from our uncle and aunt, that
you have actually seen Pemberley.”

She replied in the affirmative.

“I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much
for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the
old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of
me. But of course she did not mention my name to you.”

“Yes, she did.”

“And what did she say?”

“That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had--not turned
out well. At such a distance as _that_, you know, things are strangely
misrepresented.”

“Certainly,” he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had
silenced him; but he soon afterwards said,--

“I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other
several times. I wonder what he can be doing there.”

“Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh,” said
Elizabeth. “It must be something particular to take him there at this
time of year.”

“Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I thought I
understood from the Gardiners that you had.”

“Yes; he introduced us to his sister.”

“And do you like her?”

“Very much.”

“I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year
or two. When I last saw her, she was not very promising. I am very glad
you liked her. I hope she will turn out well.”

“I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.”

“Did you go by the village of Kympton?”

“I do not recollect that we did.”

“I mention it because it is the living which I ought to have had. A most
delightful place! Excellent parsonage-house! It would have suited me in
every respect.”

“How should you have liked making sermons?”

“Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and
the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought not to repine; but,
to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The quiet, the
retirement of such a life, would have answered all my ideas of
happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the
circumstance when you were in Kent?”

“I _have_ heard from authority, which I thought _as good_, that it was
left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.”

“You have! Yes, there was something in _that_; I told you so from the
first, you may remember.”

“I _did_ hear, too, that there was a time when sermon-making was not so
palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually
declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business
had been compromised accordingly.”

“You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember
what I told you on that point, when first we talked of it.”

They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast
to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sister’s sake, to provoke him,
she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile,--

“Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let us
quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be always of one
mind.”

She held out her hand: he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though
he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.

[Illustration:

“Mr. Darcy with him.”
]

CHAPTER LIII.

[Illustration]

Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation, that he
never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth,
by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she
had said enough to keep him quiet.

The day of his and Lydia’s departure soon came; and Mrs. Bennet was
forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means
entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to
continue at least a twelvemonth.

“Oh, my dear Lydia,” she cried, “when shall we meet again?”

“Oh, Lord! I don’t know. Not these two or three years, perhaps.”

“Write to me very often, my dear.”

“As often as I can. But you know married women have never much time for
writing. My sisters may write to _me_. They will have nothing else to
do.”

Mr. Wickham’s adieus were much more affectionate than his wife’s. He
smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.

“He is as fine a fellow,” said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of
the house, “as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us
all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William Lucas
himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law.”

The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days.

“I often think,” said she, “that there is nothing so bad as parting with
one’s friends. One seems so forlorn without them.”

“This is the consequence, you see, madam, of marrying a daughter,” said
Elizabeth. “It must make you better satisfied that your other four are
single.”

“It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is married;
but only because her husband’s regiment happens to be so far off. If
that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.”

But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly
relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an
article of news which then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper
at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her
master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several
weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and
smiled, and shook her head, by turns.

“Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister,” (for Mrs.
Philips first brought her the news). “Well, so much the better. Not that
I care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am sure I
never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome to come to
Netherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what _may_ happen? But that
is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to mention
a word about it. And so, it is quite certain he is coming?”

“You may depend on it,” replied the other, “for Mrs. Nichols was in
Meryton last night: I saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose
to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certainly true. He
comes down on Thursday, at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. She was
going to the butcher’s, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on
Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed.”

Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing
colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name to
Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said,--

“I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present
report; and I know I appeared distressed; but don’t imagine it was from
any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that
I _should_ be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect
me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes
alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of
_myself_, but I dread other people’s remarks.”

Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in
Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no
other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial
to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming
there _with_ his friend’s permission, or being bold enough to come
without it.

“Yet it is hard,” she sometimes thought, “that this poor man cannot come
to a house, which he has legally hired, without raising all this
speculation! I _will_ leave him to himself.”

In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her
feelings, in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily
perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed,
more unequal, than she had often seen them.

The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents,
about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.

“As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear,” said Mrs. Bennet, “you
will wait on him, of course.”

“No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I
went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended in
nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool’s errand again.”

His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention
would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to
Netherfield.

“’Tis an _etiquette_ I despise,” said he. “If he wants our society, let
him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not spend _my_ hours in
running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back
again.”

“Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait
on him. But, however, that shan’t prevent my asking him to dine here, I
am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That will
make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for
him.”

Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her
husband’s incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her
neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before
_they_ did. As the day of his arrival drew near,--

“I begin to be sorry that he comes at all,” said Jane to her sister. “It
would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference; but I can
hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well;
but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she
says. Happy shall I be when his stay at Netherfield is over!”

“I wish I could say anything to comfort you,” replied Elizabeth; “but it
is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction
of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have
always so much.”

Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants,
contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety
and fretfulness on her side be as long as it could. She counted the days
that must intervene before their invitation could be sent--hopeless of
seeing him before. But on the third morning after his arrival in
Hertfordshire, she saw him from her dressing-room window enter the
paddock, and ride towards the house.

Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely
kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went
to the window--she looked--she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down
again by her sister.

“There is a gentleman with him, mamma,” said Kitty; “who can it be?”

“Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not
know.”

“La!” replied Kitty, “it looks just like that man that used to be with
him before. Mr. what’s his name--that tall, proud man.”

“Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!--and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of
Mr. Bingley’s will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must
say that I hate the very sight of him.”

Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little
of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness
which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time
after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were uncomfortable
enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their
mother talked on of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be
civil to him only as Mr. Bingley’s friend, without being heard by either
of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not yet be
suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to show Mrs.
Gardiner’s letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards
him. To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused,
and whose merits she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive
information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted
for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an
interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just, as
what Jane felt for Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming--at his
coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again,
was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered
behaviour in Derbyshire.

The colour which had been driven from her face returned for half a
minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to
her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and
wishes must still be unshaken; but she would not be secure.

“Let me first see how he behaves,” said she; “it will then be early
enough for expectation.”

She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to
lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of her
sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little
paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the
gentlemen’s appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with
tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any
symptom of resentment, or any unnecessary complaisance.

Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down
again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command. She
had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious as usual; and,
she thought, more as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as
she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps, he could not in her
mother’s presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. It was a
painful, but not an improbable, conjecture.

Bingley she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period
saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs.
Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed,
especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of
her courtesy and address of his friend.

Elizabeth particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter the
preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, was
hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill
applied.

Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did--a question
which she could not answer without confusion--said scarcely anything. He
was not seated by her: perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but
it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her friends
when he could not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed, without
bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist
the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often
found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but
the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when
they last met, were plainly expressed. She was disappointed, and angry
with herself for being so.

“Could I expect it to be otherwise?” said she. “Yet why did he come?”

She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to
him she had hardly courage to speak.

She inquired after his sister, but could do no more.

“It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away,” said Mrs. Bennet.

He readily agreed to it.

“I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People _did_ say,
you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope
it is not true. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood
since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled: and one of my
own daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have
seen it in the papers. It was in the ‘Times’ and the ‘Courier,’ I know;
though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, ‘Lately,
George Wickham, Esq., to Miss Lydia Bennet,’ without there being a
syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything.
It was my brother Gardiner’s drawing up, too, and I wonder how he came
to make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?”

Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations. Elizabeth
dared not lift up her eyes. How Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, she could
not tell.

“It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married,”
continued her mother; “but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very
hard to have her taken away from me. They are gone down to Newcastle, a
place quite northward it seems, and there they are to stay, I do not
know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of
his leaving the ----shire, and of his being gone into the Regulars.
Thank heaven! he has _some_ friends, though, perhaps, not so many as he
deserves.”

Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such misery
of shame that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her, however,
the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done
before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in the
country at present. A few weeks, he believed.

“When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley,” said her mother,
“I beg you will come here and shoot as many as you please on Mr.
Bennet’s manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and
will save all the best of the coveys for you.”

Elizabeth’s misery increased at such unnecessary, such officious
attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present, as had
flattered them a year ago, everything, she was persuaded, would be
hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant she felt,
that years of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends for
moments of such painful confusion.

“The first wish of my heart,” said she to herself, “is never more to be
in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure
that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either
one or the other again!”

Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no
compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing
how much the beauty of her sister rekindled the admiration of her former
lover. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little, but every
five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He found her
as handsome as she had been last year; as good-natured, and as
unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no
difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded
that she talked as much as ever; but her mind was so busily engaged,
that she did not always know when she was silent.

When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her
intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at
Longbourn in a few days’ time.

“You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley,” she added; “for when
you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner with
us as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure you
I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep your
engagement.”

Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of
his concern at having been prevented by business. They then went away.

Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine
there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did
not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man
on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride
of one who had ten thousand a year.

[Illustration:

     “Jane happened to look round”
]

CHAPTER LIV.

[Illustration]

As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits;
or, in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects
which must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy’s behaviour astonished and vexed
her.

“Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,” said she,
“did he come at all?”

She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.

“He could be still amiable, still pleasing to my uncle and aunt, when he
was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If he
no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing, teasing man! I will think
no more about him.”

Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach
of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look which showed her
better satisfied with their visitors than Elizabeth.

“Now,” said she, “that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly
easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by
his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly
seen, that on both sides we meet only as common and indifferent
acquaintance.”

“Yes, very indifferent, indeed,” said Elizabeth, laughingly. “Oh, Jane!
take care.”

“My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak as to be in danger now.”

“I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with
you as ever.”

They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in
the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes which the
good-humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour’s visit,
had revived.

On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two
who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as
sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the
dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take
the place which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by
her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to
invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to
hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was
decided. He placed himself by her.

Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. He
bore it with noble indifference; and she would have imagined that
Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes
likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing
alarm.

His behaviour to her sister was such during dinnertime as showed an
admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded
Elizabeth, that, if left wholly to himself, Jane’s happiness, and his
own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the
consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It
gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in
no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table
could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little
such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to
advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse; but
she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and
cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother’s ungraciousness
made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth’s mind;
and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell
him, that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of
the family.

She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of
bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away
without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation,
than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious and
uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room before the gentlemen
came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil.
She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her
chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.

“If he does not come to me, _then_,” said she, “I shall give him up for
ever.”

The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have
answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table,
where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee,
in so close a confederacy, that there was not a single vacancy near her
which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen’s approaching, one of
the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper,--

“The men shan’t come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them;
do we?”

Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with
her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough
to help anybody to coffee, and then was enraged against herself for
being so silly!

“A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to
expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex who would not
protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman?
There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings.”

She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee-cup
himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying,--

“Is your sister at Pemberley still?”

“Yes; she will remain there till Christmas.”

“And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?”

“Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to Scarborough
these three weeks.”

She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse
with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for
some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady’s whispering
to Elizabeth again, he walked away.

When the tea things were removed, and the card tables placed, the ladies
all rose; and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when
all her views were overthrown, by seeing him fall a victim to her
mother’s rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated
with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure.
They were confined for the evening at different tables; and she had
nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side
of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.

Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to
supper; but their carriage was, unluckily, ordered before any of the
others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.

“Well, girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, “what
say you to the day? I think everything has passed off uncommonly well, I
assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The
venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said, they never saw so fat
a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the
Lucases’ last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged that the partridges
were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or three French
cooks at least. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater
beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And
what do you think she said besides? ‘Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall have her
at Netherfield at last!’ She did, indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as
good a creature as ever lived--and her nieces are very pretty behaved
girls, and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously.”

[Illustration:

     “M^{rs}. Long and her nieces.”
]

Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits: she had seen enough of
Bingley’s behaviour to Jane to be convinced that she would get him at
last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy
humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at
not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals.

“It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. “The
party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we
may often meet again.”

Elizabeth smiled.

“Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me. I
assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an
agreeable and sensible young man without having a wish beyond it. I am
perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had
any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed with
greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally
pleasing, than any other man.”

“You are very cruel,” said her sister, “you will not let me smile, and
are provoking me to it every moment.”

“How hard it is in some cases to be believed! And how impossible in
others! But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I
acknowledge?”

“That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all love to
instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing. Forgive
me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make _me_ your
confidante.”

[Illustration:

     “Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak to you.”
]

CHAPTER LV.

[Illustration]

A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. His
friend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in
ten days’ time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably
good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many
expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere.

“Next time you call,” said she, “I hope we shall be more lucky.”

He should be particularly happy at any time, etc., etc.; and if she
would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on
them.

“Can you come to-morrow?”

Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; and her invitation was
accepted with alacrity.

He came, and in such very good time, that the ladies were none of them
dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her daughters’ room, in her
dressing-gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out,--

“My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come--Mr. Bingley is
come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come to Miss
Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never mind Miss
Lizzy’s hair.”

“We will be down as soon as we can,” said Jane; “but I dare say Kitty is
forwarder than either of us, for she went upstairs half an hour ago.”

“Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come, be quick, be quick!
where is your sash, my dear?”

But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down
without one of her sisters.

The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the
evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was his
custom, and Mary went upstairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of the
five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any
impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last
Kitty did, she very innocently said, “What is the matter, mamma? What do
you keep winking at me for? What am I to do?”

“Nothing, child, nothing. I did not wink at you.” She then sat still
five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she
suddenly got up, and saying to Kitty,--

“Come here, my love, I want to speak to you,” took her out of the room.
Jane instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such
premeditation, and her entreaty that _she_ would not give in to it. In a
few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half opened the door and called out,--

“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.”

Elizabeth was forced to go.

“We may as well leave them by themselves, you know,” said her mother as
soon as she was in the hall. “Kitty and I are going upstairs to sit in
my dressing-room.”

Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained
quietly in the hall till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned
into the drawing-room.

Mrs. Bennet’s schemes for this day were ineffectual. Bingley was
everything that was charming, except the professed lover of her
daughter. His ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable
addition to their evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged
officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a
forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the
daughter.

He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went away
an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and Mrs. Bennet’s
means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband.

After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed
between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in the
happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy
returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably
persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentleman’s
concurrence.

Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent the
morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much more
agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of presumption
or folly in Bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into
silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the
other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner;
and in the evening Mrs. Bennet’s invention was again at work to get
everybody away from him and her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter to
write, went into the breakfast-room for that purpose soon after tea; for
as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be
wanted to counteract her mother’s schemes.

But on her returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished,
she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her
mother had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she
perceived her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as
if engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion,
the faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each
other, would have told it all. _Their_ situation was awkward enough; but
_hers_ she thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by
either; and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when
Bingley, who as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and,
whispering a few words to her sister, ran out of the room.

Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give
pleasure; and, instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest
emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.

“’Tis too much!” she added, “by far too much. I do not deserve it. Oh,
why is not everybody as happy?”

Elizabeth’s congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth, a
delight, which words could but poorly express. Every sentence of
kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not
allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be
said, for the present.

“I must go instantly to my mother,” she cried. “I would not on any
account trifle with her affectionate solicitude, or allow her to hear it
from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh, Lizzy, to
know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear
family! how shall I bear so much happiness?”

She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the
card-party, and was sitting upstairs with Kitty.

Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease
with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many
previous months of suspense and vexation.

“And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend’s anxious
circumspection! of all his sister’s falsehood and contrivance! the
happiest, wisest, and most reasonable end!”

In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with her
father had been short and to the purpose.

“Where is your sister?” said he hastily, as he opened the door.

“With my mother upstairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare say.”

He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes
and affection of a sister. Elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed her
delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with
great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen
to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of Jane’s perfections;
and in spite of his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his
expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for
basis the excellent understanding and super-excellent disposition of
Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and
himself.

It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of
Miss Bennet’s mind gave such a glow of sweet animation to her face, as
made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped
her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent, or
speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings,
though she talked to Bingley of nothing else, for half an hour; and when
Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed
how really happy he was.

Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their
visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he
turned to his daughter and said,--

“Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman.”

Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his
goodness.

“You are a good girl,” he replied, “and I have great pleasure in
thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not a doubt of your
doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are
each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so
easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will
always exceed your income.”

“I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be
unpardonable in _me_.”

“Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet,” cried his wife, “what are you
talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely
more.” Then addressing her daughter, “Oh, my dear, dear Jane, I am so
happy! I am sure I shan’t get a wink of sleep all night. I knew how it
would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not
be so beautiful for nothing! I remember, as soon as ever I saw him, when
he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was
that you should come together. Oh, he is the handsomest young man that
ever was seen!”

Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her
favourite child. At that moment she cared for no other. Her younger
sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness
which she might in future be able to dispense.

Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty
begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.

Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn;
coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after
supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough
detested, had given him an invitation to dinner, which he thought
himself obliged to accept.

Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister; for
while he was present Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone else: but
she found herself considerably useful to both of them, in those hours of
separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence of Jane, he always
attached himself to Elizabeth for the pleasure of talking of her; and
when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of relief.

“He has made me so happy,” said she, one evening, “by telling me that he
was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had not believed
it possible.”

“I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeth. “But how did he account for
it?”

“It must have been his sisters’ doing. They were certainly no friends to
his acquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have
chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see,
as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will
learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again: though we
can never be what we once were to each other.”

“That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I ever
heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again
the dupe of Miss Bingley’s pretended regard.”

“Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last November he
really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of _my_ being indifferent
would have prevented his coming down again?”

“He made a little mistake, to be sure; but it is to the credit of his
modesty.”

This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence, and
the little value he put on his own good qualities.

Elizabeth was pleased to find that he had not betrayed the interference
of his friend; for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving
heart in the world, she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice
her against him.

“I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!” cried
Jane. “Oh, Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed
above them all? If I could but see you as happy! If there were but such
another man for you!”

“If you were to give me forty such men I never could be so happy as you.
Till I have your disposition, your goodness, I never can have your
happiness. No, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if I have very
good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time.”

The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a
secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged to whisper it to Mrs. Philips, and
she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her
neighbours in Meryton.

The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the
world; though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away,
they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER LVI.

[Illustration]

One morning, about a week after Bingley’s engagement with Jane had been
formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the
dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window by the
sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up the
lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors; and besides, the
equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours. The horses
were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who
preceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that
somebody was coming, Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid
the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the
shrubbery. They both set off; and the conjectures of the remaining three
continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown
open, and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh.

They were of course all intending to be surprised: but their
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs.
Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even
inferior to what Elizabeth felt.

She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no
other reply to Elizabeth’s salutation than a slight inclination of the
head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her
name to her mother on her Ladyship’s entrance, though no request of
introduction had been made.

Mrs. Bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such
high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting
for a moment in silence, she said, very stiffly, to Elizabeth,--

“I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady, I suppose, is your
mother?”

Elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.

“And _that_, I suppose, is one of your sisters?”

“Yes, madam,” said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to a Lady Catherine.
“She is my youngest girl but one. My youngest of all is lately married,
and my eldest is somewhere about the ground, walking with a young man,
who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family.”

“You have a very small park here,” returned Lady Catherine, after a
short silence.

“It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my Lady, I dare say; but, I
assure you, it is much larger than Sir William Lucas’s.”

“This must be a most inconvenient sitting-room for the evening in
summer: the windows are full west.”

Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner; and then
added,--

“May I take the liberty of asking your Ladyship whether you left Mr. and
Mrs. Collins well?”

“Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last.”

Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from
Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling. But no
letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.

Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, begged her Ladyship to take some
refreshment: but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,
declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,--

“Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness
on one side of your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you
will favour me with your company.”

“Go, my dear,” cried her mother, “and show her Ladyship about the
different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.”

Elizabeth obeyed; and, running into her own room for her parasol,
attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the hall,
Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and
drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be
decent-looking rooms, walked on.

Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her
waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk
that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for
conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and
disagreeable.

[Illustration:

“After a short survey”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

“How could I ever think her like her nephew?” said she, as she looked in
her face.

As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following
manner:--

“You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my
journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I
come.”

Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.

“Indeed, you are mistaken, madam; I have not been at all able to account
for the honour of seeing you here.”

“Miss Bennet,” replied her Ladyship, in an angry tone, “you ought to
know that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere _you_ may
choose to be, you shall not find _me_ so. My character has ever been
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness; and in a cause of such
moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most
alarming nature reached me two days ago. I was told, that not only your
sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that
_you_--that Miss Elizabeth Bennet would, in all likelihood, be soon
afterwards united to my nephew--my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I
_know_ it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him
so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on
setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to
you.”

“If you believed it impossible to be true,” said Elizabeth, colouring
with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the trouble of coming
so far. What could your Ladyship propose by it?”

“At once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.”

“Your coming to Longbourn, to see me and my family,” said Elizabeth
coolly, “will be rather a confirmation of it--if, indeed, such a report
is in existence.”

“If! do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been
industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a
report is spread abroad?”

“I never heard that it was.”

“And can you likewise declare, that there is no _foundation_ for it?”

“I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your Ladyship. _You_
may ask questions which _I_ shall not choose to answer.”

“This is not to be borne. Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied. Has
he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?”

“Your Ladyship has declared it to be impossible.”

“It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his
reason. But _your_ arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation,
have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family. You
may have drawn him in.”

“If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.”

“Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such
language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world,
and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”

“But you are not entitled to know _mine_; nor will such behaviour as
this ever induce me to be explicit.”

“Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the
presumption to aspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is
engaged to _my daughter_. Now, what have you to say?”

“Only this,--that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will
make an offer to me.”

Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied,--

“The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy,
they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of
_his_ mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles we planned the
union; and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be
accomplished, is their marriage to be prevented by a young woman of
inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to
the family? Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends--to his
tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of
propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say, that from his
earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?”

“Yes; and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is no
other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not be
kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry
Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the
marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither by
honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make
another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?”

“Because honour, decorum, prudence--nay, interest--forbid it. Yes, Miss
Bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or
friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will
be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him.
Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned
by any of us.”

“These are heavy misfortunes,” replied Elizabeth. “But the wife of Mr.
Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily
attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause
to repine.”

“Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you! Is this your gratitude
for my attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to me on that
score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came
here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will I
be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any person’s
whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.”

“_That_ will make your Ladyship’s situation at present more pitiable;
but it will have no effect on _me_.”

“I will not be interrupted! Hear me in silence. My daughter and my
nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father’s, from respectable,
honourable, and ancient, though untitled, families. Their fortune on
both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of
every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide
them?--the upstart pretensions of a young woman without family,
connections, or fortune! Is this to be endured? But it must not, shall
not be! If you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to
quit the sphere in which you have been brought up.”

“In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that
sphere. He is a gentleman; I am a gentleman’s daughter; so far we are
equal.”

“True. You _are_ a gentleman’s daughter. But what was your mother? Who
are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their
condition.”

“Whatever my connections may be,” said Elizabeth, “if your nephew does
not object to them, they can be nothing to _you_.”

“Tell me, once for all, are you engaged to him?”

Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady
Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a
moment’s deliberation,--

“I am not.”

Lady Catherine seemed pleased.

“And will you promise me never to enter into such an engagement?”

“I will make no promise of the kind.”

“Miss Bennet, I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more
reasonable young woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that I
will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the
assurance I require.”

“And I certainly _never_ shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into
anything so wholly unreasonable. Your Ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry
your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make
_their_ marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached to
me, would _my_ refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on
his cousin? Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with
which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as
frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my
character, if you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these.
How far your nephew might approve of your interference in _his_ affairs,
I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in
mine. I must beg, therefore, to be importuned no further on the
subject.”

“Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the
objections I have already urged I have still another to add. I am no
stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister’s infamous
elopement. I know it all; that the young man’s marrying her was a
patched-up business, at the expense of your father and uncle. And is
_such_ a girl to be my nephew’s sister? Is _her_ husband, who is the son
of his late father’s steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!--of
what are you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?”

“You can _now_ have nothing further to say,” she resentfully answered.
“You have insulted me, in every possible method. I must beg to return to
the house.”

And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned
back. Her Ladyship was highly incensed.

“You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew!
Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you not consider that a connection with you
must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?”

“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments.”

“You are then resolved to have him?”

“I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner,
which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without
reference to _you_, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.”

“It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the
claims of duty, honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in
the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.”

“Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied Elizabeth, “has any
possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either
would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to the
resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former
_were_ excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one moment’s
concern--and the world in general would have too much sense to join in
the scorn.”

“And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well. I
shall now know how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your
ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you
reasonable; but depend upon it I will carry my point.”

In this manner Lady Catherine talked on till they were at the door of
the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added,--

“I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your
mother. You deserve no such attention. I am most seriously displeased.”

Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her
Ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She
heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded upstairs. Her mother
impatiently met her at the door of her dressing-room, to ask why Lady
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.

“She did not choose it,” said her daughter; “she would go.”

“She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiously
civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were well.
She is on her road somewhere, I dare say; and so, passing through
Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had
nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?”

Elizabeth was forced to give in to a little falsehood here; for to
acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.

[Illustration:

     “But now it comes out”
]

CHAPTER LVII.

[Illustration]

The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw
Elizabeth into could not be easily overcome; nor could she for many
hours learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr.
Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report of
their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine;
till she recollected that _his_ being the intimate friend of Bingley,
and _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the
expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply
the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her
sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours at
Lucas Lodge, therefore, (for through their communication with the
Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine,) had
only set _that_ down as almost certain and immediate which _she_ had
looked forward to as possible at some future time.

In revolving Lady Catherine’s expressions, however, she could not help
feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting
in this interference. From what she had said of her resolution to
prevent the marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate an
application to her nephew; and how he might take a similar
representation of the evils attached to a connection with her she dared
not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his
aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose
that he thought much higher of her Ladyship than _she_ could do; and it
was certain, that in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with _one_
whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would
address him on his weakest side. With his notions of dignity, he would
probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak
and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning.

If he had been wavering before, as to what he should do, which had often
seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might
settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity
unblemished could make him. In that case he would return no more. Lady
Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to
Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way.

“If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his
friend within a few days,” she added, “I shall know how to understand
it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his
constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might
have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him
at all.”

The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had
been, was very great: but they obligingly satisfied it with the same
kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet’s curiosity; and
Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.

The next morning, as she was going down stairs, she was met by her
father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.

“Lizzy,” said he, “I was going to look for you: come into my room.”

She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell
her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner
connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck her that it might
be from Lady Catherine, and she anticipated with dismay all the
consequent explanations.

She followed her father to the fireplace, and they both sat down. He
then said,--

“I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me
exceedingly. As it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its
contents. I did not know before that I had _two_ daughters on the brink
of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest.”

The colour now rushed into Elizabeth’s cheeks in the instantaneous
conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt;
and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained
himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to
herself, when her father continued,--

“You look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters
as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity to discover the
name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr. Collins.”

“From Mr. Collins! and what can _he_ have to say?”

“Something very much to the purpose, of course. He begins with
congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of
which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping
Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience by reading what he says
on that point. What relates to yourself is as follows:--‘Having thus
offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another,
of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter
Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after
her eldest sister has resigned it; and the chosen partner of her fate
may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages
in this land.’ Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this?
‘This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with everything the
heart of mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, and
extensive patronage. Yet, in spite of all these temptations, let me warn
my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a
precipitate closure with this gentleman’s proposals, which, of course,
you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of.’ Have you any idea,
Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out. ‘My motive for
cautioning you is as follows:--We have reason to imagine that his aunt,
Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly
eye.’ _Mr. Darcy_, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_
surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man, within
the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie more
effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any
woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at _you_ in
his life! It is admirable!”

Elizabeth tried to join in her father’s pleasantry, but could only force
one most reluctant smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so
little agreeable to her.

“Are you not diverted?”

“Oh, yes. Pray read on.”

“‘After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her Ladyship last
night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she
felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that, on the score of
some family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give
her consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my
duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she
and her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.’ Mr.
Collins, moreover, adds, ‘I am truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia’s sad
business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their
living together before the marriage took place should be so generally
known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain
from declaring my amazement, at hearing that you received the young
couple into your house as soon as they were married. It was an
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should
very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them as
a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their
names to be mentioned in your hearing.’ _That_ is his notion of
Christian forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only about his dear
Charlotte’s situation, and his expectation of a young olive-branch. But,
Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be
_missish_, I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For
what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them
in our turn?”

“Oh,” cried Elizabeth, “I am exceedingly diverted. But it is so
strange!”

“Yes, _that_ is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man
it would have been nothing; but _his_ perfect indifference and _your_
pointed dislike make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate
writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins’s correspondence for any
consideration. Nay, when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving
him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and
hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine
about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?”

To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had
been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by his
repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her
feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh when she
would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her by
what he said of Mr. Darcy’s indifference; and she could do nothing but
wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that, perhaps, instead of
his seeing too _little_, she might have fancied too _much_.

[Illustration:

“The efforts of his aunt”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER LVIII.

[Illustration]

Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as
Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy
with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine’s
visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time to
tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in
momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed
their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the
habit of walking, Mary could never spare time, but the remaining five
set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to
outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy
were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty was
too much afraid of him to talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a
desperate resolution; and, perhaps, he might be doing the same.

They walked towards the Lucases’, because Kitty wished to call upon
Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern,
when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the
moment for her resolution to be executed; and while her courage was
high, she immediately said,--

“Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature, and for the sake of giving
relief to my own feelings care not how much I may be wounding yours. I
can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor
sister. Ever since I have known it I have been most anxious to
acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest
of my family I should not have merely my own gratitude to express.”

“I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,” replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise
and emotion, “that you have ever been informed of what may, in a
mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner
was so little to be trusted.”

“You must not blame my aunt. Lydia’s thoughtlessness first betrayed to
me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could
not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again,
in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced
you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the
sake of discovering them.”

“If you _will_ thank me,” he replied, “let it be for yourself alone.
That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other
inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your
_family_ owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought
only of _you_.”

Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause,
her companion added, “You are too generous to trifle with me. If your
feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. _My_
affections and wishes are unchanged; but one word from you will silence
me on this subject for ever.”

Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of
his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not
very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had undergone
so material a change since the period to which he alluded, as to make
her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances. The
happiness which this reply produced was such as he had probably never
felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as
warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. Had Elizabeth
been able to encounter his eyes, she might have seen how well the
expression of heartfelt delight diffused over his face became him: but
though she could not look she could listen; and he told her of feelings
which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his affection
every moment more valuable.

They walked on without knowing in what direction. There was too much to
be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. She
soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding
to the efforts of his aunt, who _did_ call on him in her return through
London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the
substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on
every expression of the latter, which, in her Ladyship’s apprehension,
peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance, in the belief that
such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise from
her nephew which _she_ had refused to give. But, unluckily for her
Ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.

“It taught me to hope,” said he, “as I had scarcely ever allowed myself
to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be certain, that
had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine frankly and openly.”

Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, “Yes, you know enough of
my _frankness_ to believe me capable of _that_. After abusing you so
abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all
your relations.”

“What did you say of me that I did not deserve? For though your
accusations were ill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my behaviour
to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was
unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence.”

“We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that
evening,” said Elizabeth. “The conduct of neither, if strictly
examined, will be irreproachable; but since then we have both, I hope,
improved in civility.”

“I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of what I
then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of
it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Your
reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: ‘Had you behaved in a
more gentlemanlike manner.’ Those were your words. You know not, you can
scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me; though it was some time, I
confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice.”

“I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an
impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such
a way.”

“I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every proper
feeling, I am sure you did. The turn of your countenance I shall never
forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any possible
way that would induce you to accept me.”

“Oh, do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do at
all. I assure you that I have long been most heartily ashamed of it.”

Darcy mentioned his letter. “Did it,” said he,--“did it _soon_ make you
think better of me? Did you, on reading it, give any credit to its
contents?”

She explained what its effects on her had been, and how gradually all
her former prejudices had been removed.

“I knew,” said he, “that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was
necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was one part,
especially the opening of it, which I should dread your having the power
of reading again. I can remember some expressions which might justly
make you hate me.”

“The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the
preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my
opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily
changed as that implies.”

“When I wrote that letter,” replied Darcy, “I believed myself perfectly
calm and cool; but I am since convinced that it was written in a
dreadful bitterness of spirit.”

“The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The
adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings
of the person who wrote and the person who received it are now so widely
different from what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance
attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some of my
philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you
pleasure.”

“I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. _Your_
retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment
arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of
ignorance. But with _me_, it is not so. Painful recollections will
intrude, which cannot, which ought not to be repelled. I have been a
selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a
child I was taught what was _right_, but I was not taught to correct my
temper. I was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride
and conceit. Unfortunately an only son (for many years an only _child_),
I was spoiled by my parents, who, though good themselves, (my father
particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable,) allowed, encouraged,
almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing, to care for none beyond
my own family circle, to think meanly of all the rest of the world, to
_wish_ at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with
my own. Such I was, from eight to eight-and-twenty; and such I might
still have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not
owe you! You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most
advantageous. By you, I was properly humbled. I came to you without a
doubt of my reception. You showed me how insufficient were all my
pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.”

“Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?”

“Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to be
wishing, expecting my addresses.”

“My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I assure
you. I never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me
wrong. How you must have hated me after _that_ evening!”

“Hate you! I was angry, perhaps, at first, but my anger soon began to
take a proper direction.”

“I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me when we met at
Pemberley. You blamed me for coming?”

“No, indeed, I felt nothing but surprise.”

“Your surprise could not be greater than _mine_ in being noticed by you.
My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I
confess that I did not expect to receive _more_ than my due.”

“My object _then_,” replied Darcy, “was to show you, by every civility
in my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped
to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you
see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other wishes
introduced themselves, I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half
an hour after I had seen you.”

He then told her of Georgiana’s delight in her acquaintance, and of her
disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to
the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of
following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed
before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there
had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must
comprehend.

She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to
each to be dwelt on farther.

After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know
anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that
it was time to be at home.

“What could have become of Mr. Bingley and Jane?” was a wonder which
introduced the discussion of _their_ affairs. Darcy was delighted with
their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of
it.

“I must ask whether you were surprised?” said Elizabeth.

“Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.”

“That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much.” And
though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much
the case.

“On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a
confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I told
him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his
affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had
the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself
mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent
to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was
unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.”

Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his
friend.

“Did you speak from your own observation,” said she, “when you told him
that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last spring?”

“From the former. I had narrowly observed her, during the two visits
which I had lately made her here; and I was convinced of her affection.”

“And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction to
him.”

“It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had
prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but
his reliance on mine made everything easy. I was obliged to confess one
thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not
allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months
last winter, that I had known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was
angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained
in any doubt of your sister’s sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me
now.”

Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful
friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked
herself. She remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at, and
it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness of
Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he
continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they
parted.

[Illustration:

     “Unable to utter a syllable”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER LIX.

[Illustration]

“My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?” was a question
which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered the room, and
from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to say in
reply, that they had wandered about till she was beyond her own
knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything
else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.

The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. The
acknowledged lovers talked and laughed; the unacknowledged were silent.
Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth;
and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _knew_ that she was happy
than _felt_ herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment,
there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt in
the family when her situation became known: she was aware that no one
liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a
_dislike_ which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.

At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very far
from Miss Bennet’s general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.

“You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be! Engaged to Mr. Darcy! No, no,
you shall not deceive me: I know it to be impossible.”

“This is a wretched beginning, indeed! My sole dependence was on you;
and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I
am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we
are engaged.”

Jane looked at her doubtingly. “Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much
you dislike him.”

“You know nothing of the matter. _That_ is all to be forgot. Perhaps I
did not always love him so well as I do now; but in such cases as these
a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever
remember it myself.”

Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more
seriously, assured her of its truth.

“Good heaven! can it be really so? Yet now I must believe you,” cried
Jane. “My dear, dear Lizzy, I would, I do congratulate you; but are you
certain--forgive the question--are you quite certain that you can be
happy with him?”

“There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already that we
are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased, Jane?
Shall you like to have such a brother?”

“Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more
delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you
really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than
marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought
to do?”

“Oh, yes! You will only think I feel _more_ than I ought to do when I
tell you all.”

“What do you mean?”

“Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am
afraid you will be angry.”

“My dearest sister, now be, _be_ serious. I want to talk very seriously.
Let me know everything that I am to know without delay. Will you tell me
how long you have loved him?”

“It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began;
but I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds
at Pemberley.”

Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the
desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of
attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing
further to wish.

“Now I am quite happy,” said she, “for you will be as happy as myself. I
always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you, I
must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley’s friend and your
husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But,
Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you
tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know
of it to another, not to you.”

Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling to
mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made
her equally avoid the name of his friend: but now she would no longer
conceal from her his share in Lydia’s marriage. All was acknowledged,
and half the night spent in conversation.

“Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next
morning, “if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with
our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always
coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or
other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him?
Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley’s
way.”

Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet
was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an
epithet.

As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and
shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information;
and he soon afterwards said aloud, “Mrs. Bennet, have you no more lanes
hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?”

“I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said Mrs. Bennet, “to walk
to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has
never seen the view.”

“It may do very well for the others,” replied Mr. Bingley; “but I am
sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won’t it, Kitty?”

Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great
curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently
consented. As she went upstairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her,
saying,--

“I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that
disagreeable man all to yourself; but I hope you will not mind it. It is
all for Jane’s sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to
him except just now and then; so do not put yourself to inconvenience.”

During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet’s consent should be
asked in the course of the evening: Elizabeth reserved to herself the
application for her mother’s. She could not determine how her mother
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur
would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man; but whether she
were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it
was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to
her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the
first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her
disapprobation.

In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw
Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was
extreme. She did not fear her father’s opposition, but he was going to
be made unhappy, and that it should be through her means; that _she_,
his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be
filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her, was a wretched
reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when,
looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes
he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while
pretending to admire her work, said in a whisper, “Go to your father; he
wants you in the library.” She was gone directly.

Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
“Lizzy,” said he, “what are you doing? Are you out of your senses to be
accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?”

How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more
reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from
explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give;
but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion,
of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.

“Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be
sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane.
But will they make you happy?”

“Have you any other objection,” said Elizabeth, “than your belief of my
indifference?”

“None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but
this would be nothing if you really liked him.”

“I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her eyes; “I love him.
Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not
know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in
such terms.”

“Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. He is the kind
of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse anything, which he
condescended to ask. I now give it to _you_, if you are resolved on
having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your
disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor
respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband, unless you looked
up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the
greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape
discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing
_you_ unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are
about.”

Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply;
and, at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the
object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her
estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that
his affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many
months’ suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities,
she did conquer her father’s incredulity, and reconcile him to the
match.

“Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speaking, “I have no more to
say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with
you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”

To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr. Darcy
had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment.

“This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did everything;
made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow’s debts, and got him
his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble
and economy. Had it been your uncle’s doing, I must and _would_ have
paid him; but these violent young lovers carry everything their own
way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow, he will rant and storm about
his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.”

He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before on his reading
Mr. Collins’s letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her
at last to go, saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men come
for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”

Elizabeth’s mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after
half an hour’s quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join
the others with tolerable composure. Everything was too recent for
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer
anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity
would come in time.

When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her,
and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary;
for, on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to
utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes, that she could
comprehend what she heard, though not in general backward to credit what
was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a
lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in
her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.

“Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who would
have thought it? And is it really true? Oh, my sweetest Lizzy! how rich
and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages
you will have! Jane’s is nothing to it--nothing at all. I am so
pleased--so happy. Such a charming man! so handsome! so tall! Oh, my
dear Lizzy! pray apologize for my having disliked him so much before. I
hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Everything
that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh,
Lord! what will become of me? I shall go distracted.”

This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted; and
Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself,
soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room,
her mother followed her.

“My dearest child,” she cried, “I can think of nothing else. Ten
thousand a year, and very likely more! ’Tis as good as a lord! And a
special licence--you must and shall be married by a special licence.
But, my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond
of, that I may have it to-morrow.”

This was a sad omen of what her mother’s behaviour to the gentleman
himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain
possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations’
consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow
passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood
in such awe of her intended son-in-law, that she ventured not to speak
to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark
her deference for his opinion.

Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get
acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising
every hour in his esteem.

“I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,” said he. “Wickham, perhaps,
is my favourite; but I think I shall like _your_ husband quite as well
as Jane’s.”

[Illustration:

“The obsequious civility.”

[_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]

CHAPTER LX.

[Illustration]

Elizabeth’s spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr.
Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. “How could
you begin?” said she. “I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when
you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first
place?”

“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which
laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I
knew that I _had_ begun.”

“My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my behaviour
to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke
to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now, be
sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”

“For the liveliness of your mind I did.”

“You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less.
The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious
attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking,
and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alone. I roused and
interested you, because I was so unlike _them_. Had you not been really
amiable you would have hated me for it: but in spite of the pains you
took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and
in your heart you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously
courted you. There--I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it;
and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly
reasonable. To be sure you know no actual good of me--but nobody thinks
of _that_ when they fall in love.”

“Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane, while she was
ill at Netherfield?”

“Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it
by all means. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are
to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me
to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may
be; and I shall begin directly, by asking you what made you so unwilling
to come to the point at last? What made you so shy of me, when you
first called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you
called, did you look as if you did not care about me?”

“Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.”

“But I was embarrassed.”

“And so was I.”

“You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.”

“A man who had felt less might.”

“How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that
I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long you
_would_ have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder when
you _would_ have spoken if I had not asked you! My resolution of
thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect. _Too
much_, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort
springs from a breach of promise, for I ought not to have mentioned the
subject? This will never do.”

“You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair. Lady
Catherine’s unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of
removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness to
your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour to
wait for an opening of yours. My aunt’s intelligence had given me hope,
and I was determined at once to know everything.”

“Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy,
for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to
Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?
or had you intended any more serious consequences?”

“My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I
might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to
myself, was to see whether your sister was still partial to Bingley, and
if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made.”

“Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to
befall her?”

“I am more likely to want time than courage, Elizabeth. But it ought to
be done; and if you will give me a sheet of paper it shall be done
directly.”

“And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you, and
admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But
I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.”

From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy
had been overrated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner’s
long letter; but now, having _that_ to communicate which she knew would
be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt
had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as
follows:--

“I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done,
for your long, kind, satisfactory detail of particulars; but, to say the
truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really existed.
But _now_ suppose as much as you choose; give a loose to your fancy,
indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will
afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly
err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a great deal more
than you did in your last. I thank you again and again, for not going to
the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your idea of the
ponies is delightful. We will go round the park every day. I am the
happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so
before, but no one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she
only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that
can be spared from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.
Yours,” etc.

Mr. Darcy’s letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style, and still
different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in return
for his last.

     /* “Dear Sir, */

     “I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will
     soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as
     you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has
     more to give.

“Yours sincerely,” etc.

Miss Bingley’s congratulations to her brother on his approaching
marriage were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even to
Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former
professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and
though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much
kinder answer than she knew was deserved.

The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information was
as sincere as her brother’s in sending it. Four sides of paper were
insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of
being loved by her sister.

Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations
to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the
Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this
sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered so
exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew’s letter, that
Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till
the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend
was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their
meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she
saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her
husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could even
listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away
the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all
meeting frequently at St. James’s, with very decent composure. If he did
shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.

Mrs. Philips’s vulgarity was another, and, perhaps, a greater tax on his
forbearance; and though Mrs. Philips, as well as her sister, stood in
too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley’s
good-humour encouraged; yet, whenever she _did_ speak, she must be
vulgar. Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at
all likely to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to
shield him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to
keep him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might
converse without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings
arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its
pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward
with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so
little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their
family party at Pemberley.

[Illustration]

CHAPTER LXI.

[Illustration]

Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got
rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted pride she
afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may be
guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the
accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of
her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible,
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though, perhaps,
it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic
felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous
and invariably silly.

Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her
drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He delighted in
going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.

Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near
a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to
_his_ easy temper, or _her_ affectionate heart. The darling wish of his
sisters was then gratified: he bought an estate in a neighbouring county
to Derbyshire; and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source
of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.

Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with
her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had generally
known, her improvement was great. She was not of so ungovernable a
temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia’s example, she
became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less
ignorant, and less insipid. From the further disadvantage of Lydia’s
society she was of course carefully kept; and though Mrs. Wickham
frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of
balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.

Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily
drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet’s being quite
unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but
she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no
longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters’ beauty and her own,
it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without
much reluctance.

As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from
the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that
Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude
and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and, in spite of
everything, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be
prevailed on to make his fortune. The congratulatory letter which
Elizabeth received from Lydia on her marriage explained to her that, by
his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. The
letter was to this effect:--

     /* “My dear Lizzy, */

     “I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half so well as I do my dear
     Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you
     so rich; and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will
     think of us. I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very
     much; and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live
     upon without some help. Any place would do of about three or four
     hundred a year; but, however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it,
     if you had rather not.

“Yours,” etc.

As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not, she endeavoured in
her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind.
Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice
of what might be called economy in her own private expenses, she
frequently sent them. It had always been evident to her that such an
income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in
their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to
their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or
herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance towards
discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even when the
restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the
extreme. They were always moving from place to place in quest of a
cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought. His affection
for her soon sunk into indifference: hers lasted a little longer; and,
in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to
reputation which her marriage had given her. Though Darcy could never
receive _him_ at Pemberley, yet, for Elizabeth’s sake, he assisted him
further in his profession. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when
her husband was gone to enjoy himself in London or Bath; and with the
Bingleys they both of them frequently stayed so long, that even
Bingley’s good-humour was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to _talk_
of giving them a hint to be gone.

Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy’s marriage; but as she
thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she
dropped all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as
attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility
to Elizabeth.

Pemberley was now Georgiana’s home; and the attachment of the sisters
was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each
other, even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion
in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an
astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive manner of
talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect
which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open
pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in
her way. By Elizabeth’s instructions she began to comprehend that a
woman may take liberties with her husband, which a brother will not
always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.

Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew;
and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character, in
her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him
language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time
all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth’s persuasion,
he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation;
and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her
resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity
to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait on
them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had
received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the
visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.

With the Gardiners they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy,
as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever
sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing
her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.

                            [Illustration:

                                  THE
                                  END
                                   ]

             CHISWICK PRESS:--CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.
                  TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.

There are several editions of this ebook in the Project Gutenberg
collection. Various characteristics of each ebook are listed to aid in
selecting the preferred file.
Click on any of the filenumbers below to quickly view each ebook.

1228    1859, First Edition
22764   1860, Second Edition
2009    1872, Sixth Edition, considered the definitive edition.

On the Origin of Species

BY MEANS OF NATURAL SELECTION,

OR THE PRESERVATION OF FAVOURED RACES IN THE STRUGGLE FOR LIFE.

By Charles Darwin, M.A., F.R.S.,

Author of “The Descent of Man,” etc., etc.

Sixth London Edition, with all Additions and Corrections.

“But with regard to the material world, we can at least go so far as
this—we can perceive that events are brought about not by insulated
interpositions of Divine power, exerted in each particular case, but by
the establishment of general laws.”

WHEWELL: _Bridgewater Treatise_.

“The only distinct meaning of the word ‘natural’ is _stated_, _fixed_
or _settled;_ since what is natural as much requires and presupposes an
intelligent agent to render it so, _i.e._, to effect it continually or
at stated times, as what is supernatural or miraculous does to effect
it for once.”

BUTLER: _Analogy of Revealed Religion_.

“To conclude, therefore, let no man out of a weak conceit of sobriety,
or an ill-applied moderation, think or maintain, that a man can search
too far or be too well studied in the book of God’s word, or in the
book of God’s works; divinity or philosophy; but rather let men
endeavour an endless progress or proficience in both.”

BACON: _Advancement of Learning_.

AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE PROGRESS OF OPINION ON THE ORIGIN OF
SPECIES, PREVIOUSLY TO THE PUBLICATION OF THE FIRST EDITION OF THIS
WORK.

I will here give a brief sketch of the progress of opinion on the
Origin of Species. Until recently the great majority of naturalists
believed that species were immutable productions, and had been
separately created. This view has been ably maintained by many authors.
Some few naturalists, on the other hand, have believed that species
undergo modification, and that the existing forms of life are the
descendants by true generation of pre existing forms. Passing over
allusions to the subject in the classical writers,[1] the first author
who in modern times has treated it in a scientific spirit was Buffon.
But as his opinions fluctuated greatly at different periods, and as he
does not enter on the causes or means of the transformation of species,
I need not here enter on details.

 [1] Aristotle, in his “Physicæ Auscultationes” (lib.2, cap.8, s.2),
 after remarking that rain does not fall in order to make the corn
 grow, any more than it falls to spoil the farmer’s corn when threshed
 out of doors, applies the same argument to organisation; and adds (as
 translated by Mr. Clair Grece, who first pointed out the passage to
 me), “So what hinders the different parts (of the body) from having
 this merely accidental relation in nature? as the teeth, for example,
 grow by necessity, the front ones sharp, adapted for dividing, and the
 grinders flat, and serviceable for masticating the food; since they
 were not made for the sake of this, but it was the result of accident.
 And in like manner as to other parts in which there appears to exist
 an adaptation to an end. Wheresoever, therefore, all things together
 (that is all the parts of one whole) happened like as if they were
 made for the sake of something, these were preserved, having been
 appropriately constituted by an internal spontaneity; and whatsoever
 things were not thus constituted, perished and still perish.” We here
 see the principle of natural selection shadowed forth, but how little
 Aristotle fully comprehended the principle, is shown by his remarks on
 the formation of the teeth.

Lamarck was the first man whose conclusions on the subject excited much
attention. This justly celebrated naturalist first published his views
in 1801; he much enlarged them in 1809 in his “Philosophie Zoologique”,
and subsequently, 1815, in the Introduction to his “Hist. Nat. des
Animaux sans Vertébres”. In these works he up holds the doctrine that
all species, including man, are descended from other species. He first
did the eminent service of arousing attention to the probability of all
change in the organic, as well as in the inorganic world, being the
result of law, and not of miraculous interposition. Lamarck seems to
have been chiefly led to his conclusion on the gradual change of
species, by the difficulty of distinguishing species and varieties, by
the almost perfect gradation of forms in certain groups, and by the
analogy of domestic productions. With respect to the means of
modification, he attributed something to the direct action of the
physical conditions of life, something to the crossing of already
existing forms, and much to use and disuse, that is, to the effects of
habit. To this latter agency he seems to attribute all the beautiful
adaptations in nature; such as the long neck of the giraffe for
browsing on the branches of trees. But he likewise believed in a law of
progressive development, and as all the forms of life thus tend to
progress, in order to account for the existence at the present day of
simple productions, he maintains that such forms are now spontaneously
generated.[2]

 [2] I have taken the date of the first publication of Lamarck from
 Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire’s (“Hist. Nat. Générale”, tom. ii. page
 405, 1859) excellent history of opinion on this subject. In this work
 a full account is given of Buffon’s conclusions on the same subject.
 It is curious how largely my grandfather, Dr. Erasmus Darwin,
 anticipated the views and erroneous grounds of opinion of Lamarck in
 his “Zoonomia” (vol. i. pages 500-510), published in 1794. According
 to Isid. Geoffroy there is no doubt that Goethe was an extreme
 partisan of similar views, as shown in the introduction to a work
 written in 1794 and 1795, but not published till long afterward; he
 has pointedly remarked (“Goethe als Naturforscher”, von Dr. Karl
 Meding, s. 34) that the future question for naturalists will be how,
 for instance, cattle got their horns and not for what they are used.
 It is rather a singular instance of the manner in which similar views
 arise at about the same time, that Goethe in Germany, Dr. Darwin in
 England, and Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire (as we shall immediately see) in
 France, came to the same conclusion on the origin of species, in the
 years 1794-5.

Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, as is stated in his “Life”, written by his son,
suspected, as early as 1795, that what we call species are various
degenerations of the same type. It was not until 1828 that he published
his conviction that the same forms have not been perpetuated since the
origin of all things. Geoffroy seems to have relied chiefly on the
conditions of life, or the “_monde ambiant_” as the cause of change. He
was cautious in drawing conclusions, and did not believe that existing
species are now undergoing modification; and, as his son adds, “C’est
donc un problème à réserver entièrement à l’avenir, supposé même que
l’avenir doive avoir prise sur lui.”

In 1813 Dr. W.C. Wells read before the Royal Society “An Account of a
White Female, part of whose skin resembles that of a Negro”; but his
paper was not published until his famous “Two Essays upon Dew and
Single Vision” appeared in 1818. In this paper he distinctly recognises
the principle of natural selection, and this is the first recognition
which has been indicated; but he applies it only to the races of man,
and to certain characters alone. After remarking that negroes and
mulattoes enjoy an immunity from certain tropical diseases, he
observes, firstly, that all animals tend to vary in some degree, and,
secondly, that agriculturists improve their domesticated animals by
selection; and then, he adds, but what is done in this latter case “by
art, seems to be done with equal efficacy, though more slowly, by
nature, in the formation of varieties of mankind, fitted for the
country which they inhabit. Of the accidental varieties of man, which
would occur among the first few and scattered inhabitants of the middle
regions of Africa, some one would be better fitted than others to bear
the diseases of the country. This race would consequently multiply,
while the others would decrease; not only from their in ability to
sustain the attacks of disease, but from their incapacity of contending
with their more vigorous neighbours. The colour of this vigorous race I
take for granted, from what has been already said, would be dark. But
the same disposition to form varieties still existing, a darker and a
darker race would in the course of time occur: and as the darkest would
be the best fitted for the climate, this would at length become the
most prevalent, if not the only race, in the particular country in
which it had originated.” He then extends these same views to the white
inhabitants of colder climates. I am indebted to Mr. Rowley, of the
United States, for having called my attention, through Mr. Brace, to
the above passage of Dr. Wells’ work.

The Hon. and Rev. W. Herbert, afterward Dean of Manchester, in the
fourth volume of the “Horticultural Transactions”, 1822, and in his
work on the “Amaryllidaceæ” (1837, pages 19, 339), declares that
“horticultural experiments have established, beyond the possibility of
refutation, that botanical species are only a higher and more permanent
class of varieties.” He extends the same view to animals. The dean
believes that single species of each genus were created in an
originally highly plastic condition, and that these have produced,
chiefly by inter-crossing, but likewise by variation, all our existing
species.

In 1826 Professor Grant, in the concluding paragraph in his well-known
paper (“Edinburgh Philosophical Journal”, vol. XIV, page 283) on the
Spongilla, clearly declares his belief that species are descended from
other species, and that they become improved in the course of
modification. This same view was given in his Fifty-fifth Lecture,
published in the “Lancet” in 1834.

In 1831 Mr. Patrick Matthew published his work on “Naval Timber and
Arboriculture”, in which he gives precisely the same view on the origin
of species as that (presently to be alluded to) propounded by Mr.
Wallace and myself in the “Linnean Journal”, and as that enlarged in
the present volume. Unfortunately the view was given by Mr. Matthew
very briefly in scattered passages in an appendix to a work on a
different subject, so that it remained unnoticed until Mr. Matthew
himself drew attention to it in the “Gardeners’ Chronicle”, on April 7,
1860. The differences of Mr. Matthew’s views from mine are not of much
importance: he seems to consider that the world was nearly depopulated
at successive periods, and then restocked; and he gives as an
alternative, that new forms may be generated “without the presence of
any mold or germ of former aggregates.” I am not sure that I understand
some passages; but it seems that he attributes much influence to the
direct action of the conditions of life. He clearly saw, however, the
full force of the principle of natural selection.

The celebrated geologist and naturalist, Von Buch, in his excellent
“Description Physique des Isles Canaries” (1836, page 147), clearly
expresses his belief that varieties slowly become changed into
permanent species, which are no longer capable of intercrossing.

Rafinesque, in his “New Flora of North America”, published in 1836,
wrote (page 6) as follows: “All species might have been varieties once,
and many varieties are gradually becoming species by assuming constant
and peculiar characters;” but further on (page 18) he adds, “except the
original types or ancestors of the genus.”

In 1843-44 Professor Haldeman (“Boston Journal of Nat. Hist. U.
States”, vol. iv, page 468) has ably given the arguments for and
against the hypothesis of the development and modification of species:
he seems to lean toward the side of change.

The “Vestiges of Creation” appeared in 1844. In the tenth and much
improved edition (1853) the anonymous author says (page 155): “The
proposition determined on after much consideration is, that the several
series of animated beings, from the simplest and oldest up to the
highest and most recent, are, under the providence of God, the results,
_first_, of an impulse which has been imparted to the forms of life,
advancing them, in definite times, by generation, through grades of
organisation terminating in the highest dicotyledons and vertebrata,
these grades being few in number, and generally marked by intervals of
organic character, which we find to be a practical difficulty in
ascertaining affinities; _second_, of another impulse connected with
the vital forces, tending, in the course of generations, to modify
organic structures in accordance with external circumstances, as food,
the nature of the habitat, and the meteoric agencies, these being the
‘adaptations’ of the natural theologian.” The author apparently
believes that organisation progresses by sudden leaps, but that the
effects produced by the conditions of life are gradual. He argues with
much force on general grounds that species are not immutable
productions. But I cannot see how the two supposed “impulses” account
in a scientific sense for the numerous and beautiful coadaptations
which we see throughout nature; I cannot see that we thus gain any
insight how, for instance, a woodpecker has become adapted to its
peculiar habits of life. The work, from its powerful and brilliant
style, though displaying in the early editions little accurate
knowledge and a great want of scientific caution, immediately had a
very wide circulation. In my opinion it has done excellent service in
this country in calling attention to the subject, in removing
prejudice, and in thus preparing the ground for the reception of
analogous views.

In 1846 the veteran geologist M.J. d’Omalius d’Halloy published in an
excellent though short paper (“Bulletins de l’Acad. Roy. Bruxelles”,
tom. xiii, page 581) his opinion that it is more probable that new
species have been produced by descent with modification than that they
have been separately created: the author first promulgated this opinion
in 1831.

Professor Owen, in 1849 (“Nature of Limbs”, page 86), wrote as follows:
“The archetypal idea was manifested in the flesh under diverse such
modifications, upon this planet, long prior to the existence of those
animal species that actually exemplify it. To what natural laws or
secondary causes the orderly succession and progression of such organic
phenomena may have been committed, we, as yet, are ignorant.” In his
address to the British Association, in 1858, he speaks (page li) of
“the axiom of the continuous operation of creative power, or of the
ordained becoming of living things.” Further on (page xc), after
referring to geographical distribution, he adds, “These phenomena shake
our confidence in the conclusion that the Apteryx of New Zealand and
the Red Grouse of England were distinct creations in and for those
islands respectively. Always, also, it may be well to bear in mind that
by the word ‘creation’ the zoologist means ‘a process he knows not
what.’” He amplifies this idea by adding that when such cases as that
of the Red Grouse are “enumerated by the zoologist as evidence of
distinct creation of the bird in and for such islands, he chiefly
expresses that he knows not how the Red Grouse came to be there, and
there exclusively; signifying also, by this mode of expressing such
ignorance, his belief that both the bird and the islands owed their
origin to a great first Creative Cause.” If we interpret these
sentences given in the same address, one by the other, it appears that
this eminent philosopher felt in 1858 his confidence shaken that the
Apteryx and the Red Grouse first appeared in their respective homes “he
knew not how,” or by some process “he knew not what.”

This Address was delivered after the papers by Mr. Wallace and myself
on the Origin of Species, presently to be referred to, had been read
before the Linnean Society. When the first edition of this work was
published, I was so completely deceived, as were many others, by such
expressions as “the continuous operation of creative power,” that I
included Professor Owen with other palæontologists as being firmly
convinced of the immutability of species; but it appears (“Anat. of
Vertebrates”, vol. iii, page 796) that this was on my part a
preposterous error. In the last edition of this work I inferred, and
the inference still seems to me perfectly just, from a passage
beginning with the words “no doubt the type-form,” &c.(Ibid., vol. i,
page xxxv), that Professor Owen admitted that natural selection may
have done something in the formation of a new species; but this it
appears (Ibid., vol. iii. page 798) is inaccurate and without evidence.
I also gave some extracts from a correspondence between Professor Owen
and the editor of the “London Review”, from which it appeared manifest
to the editor as well as to myself, that Professor Owen claimed to have
promulgated the theory of natural selection before I had done so; and I
expressed my surprise and satisfaction at this announcement; but as far
as it is possible to understand certain recently published passages
(Ibid., vol. iii. page 798) I have either partially or wholly again
fallen into error. It is consolatory to me that others find Professor
Owen’s controversial writings as difficult to understand and to
reconcile with each other, as I do. As far as the mere enunciation of
the principle of natural selection is concerned, it is quite immaterial
whether or not Professor Owen preceded me, for both of us, as shown in
this historical sketch, were long ago preceded by Dr. Wells and Mr.
Matthews.

M. Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, in his lectures delivered in 1850
(of which a Résumé appeared in the “Revue et Mag. de Zoolog.”, Jan.,
1851), briefly gives his reason for believing that specific characters
“sont fixés, pour chaque espèce, tant qu’elle se perpétue au milieu des
mêmes circonstances: ils se modifient, si les circonstances ambiantes
viennent à changer. En résumé, _l’observation_ des animaux sauvages
démontre deja la variabilité _limitée_ des espèces. Les _expériences_
sur les animaux sauvages devenus domestiques, et sur les animaux
domestiques redevenus sauvages, la démontrent plus clairment encore.
Ces mêmes expériences prouvent, de plus, que les différences produites
peuvent être de _valeur générique_.” In his “Hist. Nat. Générale” (tom.
ii, page 430, 1859) he amplifies analogous conclusions.

From a circular lately issued it appears that Dr. Freke, in 1851
(“Dublin Medical Press”, page 322), propounded the doctrine that all
organic beings have descended from one primordial form. His grounds of
belief and treatment of the subject are wholly different from mine; but
as Dr. Freke has now (1861) published his Essay on the “Origin of
Species by means of Organic Affinity”, the difficult attempt to give
any idea of his views would be superfluous on my part.

Mr. Herbert Spencer, in an Essay (originally published in the “Leader”,
March, 1852, and republished in his “Essays”, in 1858), has contrasted
the theories of the Creation and the Development of organic beings with
remarkable skill and force. He argues from the analogy of domestic
productions, from the changes which the embryos of many species
undergo, from the difficulty of distinguishing species and varieties,
and from the principle of general gradation, that species have been
modified; and he attributes the modification to the change of
circumstances. The author (1855) has also treated Psychology on the
principle of the necessary acquirement of each mental power and
capacity by gradation.

In 1852 M. Naudin, a distinguished botanist, expressly stated, in an
admirable paper on the Origin of Species (“Revue Horticole”, page 102;
since partly republished in the “Nouvelles Archives du Muséum”, tom. i,
p. 171), his belief that species are formed in an analogous manner as
varieties are under cultivation; and the latter process he attributes
to man’s power of selection. But he does not show how selection acts
under nature. He believes, like Dean Herbert, that species, when
nascent, were more plastic than at present. He lays weight on what he
calls the principle of finality, “puissance mystérieuse, indéterminée;
fatalité pour les uns; pour les autres volonté providentielle, dont
l’action incessante sur les êtres vivantes détermine, à toutes les
époques de l’existence du monde, la forme, le volume, et la durée de
chacun d’eux, en raison de sa destinée dans l’ordre de choses dont il
fait partie. C’est cette puissance qui harmonise chaque membre à
l’ensemble, en l’appropriant à la fonction qu’il doit remplir dans
l’organisme général de la nature, fonction qui est pour lui sa raison
d’être.”[3]

 [3] From references in Bronn’s “Untersuchungen über die
 Entwickelungs-Gesetze”, it appears that the celebrated botanist and
 palæontologist Unger published, in 1852, his belief that species
 undergo development and modification. Dalton, likewise, in Pander and
 Dalton’s work on Fossil Sloths, expressed, in 1821, a similar belief.
 Similar views have, as is well known, been maintained by Oken in his
 mystical “Natur-Philosophie”. From other references in Godron’s work
 “Sur l’Espèce”, it seems that Bory St. Vincent, Burdach, Poiret and
 Fries, have all admitted that new species are continually being
 produced.
    I may add, that of the thirty-four authors named in this Historical
    Sketch, who believe in the modification of species, or at least
    disbelieve in separate acts of creation, twenty-seven have written
    on special branches of natural history or geology.

In 1853 a celebrated geologist, Count Keyserling (“Bulletin de la Soc.
Geolog.”, 2nd Ser., tom. x, page 357), suggested that as new diseases,
supposed to have been caused by some miasma have arisen and spread over
the world, so at certain periods the germs of existing species may have
been chemically affected by circumambient molecules of a particular
nature, and thus have given rise to new forms.

In this same year, 1853, Dr. Schaaffhausen published an excellent
pamphlet (“Verhand. des Naturhist. Vereins der Preuss. Rheinlands”,
&c.), in which he maintains the development of organic forms on the
earth. He infers that many species have kept true for long periods,
whereas a few have become modified. The distinction of species he
explains by the destruction of intermediate graduated forms. “Thus
living plants and animals are not separated from the extinct by new
creations, but are to be regarded as their descendants through
continued reproduction.”

A well-known French botanist, M. Lecoq, writes in 1854 (“Etudes sur
Géograph.” Bot. tom. i, page 250), “On voit que nos recherches sur la
fixité ou la variation de l’espéce, nous conduisent directement aux
idées émises par deux hommes justement célèbres, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire
et Goethe.” Some other passages scattered through M. Lecoq’s large work
make it a little doubtful how far he extends his views on the
modification of species.

The “Philosophy of Creation” has been treated in a masterly manner by
the Rev. Baden Powell, in his “Essays on the Unity of Worlds”, 1855.
Nothing can be more striking than the manner in which he shows that the
introduction of new species is “a regular, not a casual phenomenon,”
or, as Sir John Herschel expresses it, “a natural in contradistinction
to a miraculous process.”

The third volume of the “Journal of the Linnean Society” contains
papers, read July 1, 1858, by Mr. Wallace and myself, in which, as
stated in the introductory remarks to this volume, the theory of
Natural Selection is promulgated by Mr. Wallace with admirable force
and clearness.

Von Baer, toward whom all zoologists feel so profound a respect,
expressed about the year 1859 (see Prof. Rudolph Wagner,
“Zoologisch-Anthropologische Untersuchungen”, 1861, s. 51) his
conviction, chiefly grounded on the laws of geographical distribution,
that forms now perfectly distinct have descended from a single
parent-form.

In June, 1859, Professor Huxley gave a lecture before the Royal
Institution on the ‘Persistent Types of Animal Life’. Referring to such
cases, he remarks, “It is difficult to comprehend the meaning of such
facts as these, if we suppose that each species of animal and plant, or
each great type of organisation, was formed and placed upon the surface
of the globe at long intervals by a distinct act of creative power; and
it is well to recollect that such an assumption is as unsupported by
tradition or revelation as it is opposed to the general analogy of
nature. If, on the other hand, we view ‘Persistent Types’ in relation
to that hypothesis which supposes the species living at any time to be
the result of the gradual modification of pre-existing species, a
hypothesis which, though unproven, and sadly damaged by some of its
supporters, is yet the only one to which physiology lends any
countenance; their existence would seem to show that the amount of
modification which living beings have undergone during geological time
is but very small in relation to the whole series of changes which they
have suffered.”

In December, 1859, Dr. Hooker published his “Introduction to the
Australian Flora”. In the first part of this great work he admits the
truth of the descent and modification of species, and supports this
doctrine by many original observations.

The first edition of this work was published on November 24, 1859, and
the second edition on January 7, 1860.

Contents

AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE PROGRESS OF OPINION ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES
INTRODUCTION.

CHAPTER I. VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION
CHAPTER II. VARIATION UNDER NATURE
CHAPTER III. STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE
CHAPTER IV. NATURAL SELECTION; OR THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST
CHAPTER V. LAWS OF VARIATION
CHAPTER VI. DIFFICULTIES OF THE THEORY
CHAPTER VII. MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTIONS TO THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION
CHAPTER VIII. INSTINCT
CHAPTER IX. HYBRIDISM
CHAPTER X. ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD
CHAPTER XI. ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS
CHAPTER XII. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION
CHAPTER XIII. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION—continued
CHAPTER XIV. MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS
CHAPTER XV. RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION

GLOSSARY OF THE PRINCIPAL SCIENTIFIC TERMS USED IN THE PRESENT VOLUME.
INDEX.

DETAILED CONTENTS.

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER I.
VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION.
Causes of Variability—Effects of Habit and the use or disuse of
Parts—Correlated Variation—Inheritance—Character of Domestic
Varieties—Difficulty of distinguishing between Varieties and
Species—Origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more Species—Domestic
Pigeons, their Differences and Origin—Principles of Selection,
anciently followed, their Effects—Methodical and Unconscious
Selection—Unknown Origin of our Domestic Productions—Circumstances
favourable to Man’s power of Selection.

CHAPTER II.
VARIATION UNDER NATURE.
Variability—Individual Differences—Doubtful species—Wide ranging, much
diffused, and common species, vary most—Species of the larger genera in
each country vary more frequently than the species of the smaller
genera—Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in
being very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having
restricted ranges.

CHAPTER III.
STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.
Its bearing on natural selection—The term used in a wide
sense—Geometrical ratio of increase—Rapid increase of naturalised
animals and plants—Nature of the checks to increase—Competition
universal—Effects of climate—Protection from the number of
individuals—Complex relations of all animals and plants throughout
nature—Struggle for life most severe between individuals and varieties
of the same species; often severe between species of the same genus—The
relation of organism to organism the most important of all relations.

CHAPTER IV.
NATURAL SELECTION; OR THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST.
Natural Selection—its power compared with man’s selection—its power on
characters of trifling importance—its power at all ages and on both
sexes—Sexual Selection—On the generality of intercrosses between
individuals of the same species—Circumstances favourable and
unfavourable to the results of Natural Selection, namely,
intercrossing, isolation, number of individuals—Slow action—Extinction
caused by Natural Selection—Divergence of Character, related to the
diversity of inhabitants of any small area and to naturalisation—Action
of Natural Selection, through Divergence of Character and Extinction,
on the descendants from a common parent—Explains the Grouping of all
organic beings—Advance in organisation—Low forms preserved—Convergence
of character—Indefinite multiplication of species—Summary.

CHAPTER V.
LAWS OF VARIATION.
Effects of changed conditions—Use and disuse, combined with natural
selection; organs of flight and of vision—Acclimatisation—Correlated
variation—Compensation and economy of growth—False
correlations—Multiple, rudimentary, and lowly organised structures
variable—Parts developed in an unusual manner are highly variable;
specific characters more variable than generic; secondary sexual
characters variable—Species of the same genus vary in an analogous
manner—Reversions to long-lost characters—Summary.

CHAPTER VI.
DIFFICULTIES OF THE THEORY.
Difficulties of the theory of descent with modification—Absence or
rarity of transitional varieties—Transitions in habits of
life—Diversified habits in the same species—Species with habits widely
different from those of their allies—Organs of extreme perfection—Modes
of transition—Cases of difficulty—Natura non facit saltum—Organs of
small importance—Organs not in all cases absolutely perfect—The law of
Unity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence embraced by the theory
of Natural Selection.

CHAPTER VII.
MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTIONS TO THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION.
Longevity—Modifications not necessarily simultaneous—Modifications
apparently of no direct service—Progressive development—Characters of
small functional importance, the most constant—Supposed incompetence of
natural selection to account for the incipient stages of useful
structures—Causes which interfere with the acquisition through natural
selection of useful structures—Gradations of structure with changed
functions—Widely different organs in members of the same class,
developed from one and the same source—Reasons for disbelieving in
great and abrupt modifications.

CHAPTER VIII.
INSTINCT.
Instincts comparable with habits, but different in their
origin—Instincts graduated—Aphides and ants—Instincts variable—Domestic
instincts, their origin—Natural instincts of the cuckoo, molothrus,
ostrich, and parasitic bees—Slave-making ants—Hive-bee, its cell-making
instinct—Changes of instinct and structure not necessarily
simultaneous—Difficulties on the theory of the Natural Selection of
instincts—Neuter or sterile insects—Summary.

CHAPTER IX.
HYBRIDISM.
Distinction between the sterility of first crosses and of
hybrids—Sterility various in degree, not universal, affected by close
interbreeding, removed by domestication—Laws governing the sterility of
hybrids—Sterility not a special endowment, but incidental on other
differences, not accumulated by natural selection—Causes of the
sterility of first crosses and of hybrids—Parallelism between the
effects of changed conditions of life and of crossing—Dimorphism and
Trimorphism—Fertility of varieties when crossed and of their mongrel
offspring not universal—Hybrids and mongrels compared independently of
their fertility—Summary.

CHAPTER X.
ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD.
On the absence of intermediate varieties at the present day—On the
nature of extinct intermediate varieties; on their number—On the lapse
of time, as inferred from the rate of denudation and of deposition—On
the lapse of time as estimated in years—On the poorness of our
palæontological collections—On the intermittence of geological
formations—On the denudation of granitic areas—On the absence of
intermediate varieties in any one formation—On the sudden appearance of
groups of species—On their sudden appearance in the lowest known
fossiliferous strata—Antiquity of the habitable earth.

CHAPTER XI.
ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS.
On the slow and successive appearance of new species—On their different
rates of change—Species once lost do not reappear—Groups of species
follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as
do single species—On extinction—On simultaneous changes in the forms of
life throughout the world—On the affinities of extinct species to each
other and to living species—On the state of development of ancient
forms—On the succession of the same types within the same areas—Summary
of preceding and present chapter.

CHAPTER XII.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.
Present distribution cannot be accounted for by differences in physical
conditions—Importance of barriers—Affinity of the productions of the
same continent—Centres of creation—Means of dispersal by changes of
climate and of the level of the land, and by occasional means—Dispersal
during the Glacial period—Alternate Glacial periods in the north and
south.

CHAPTER XIII.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION—_continued_.
Distribution of fresh-water productions—On the inhabitants of oceanic
islands—Absence of Batrachians and of terrestrial Mammals—On the
relation of the inhabitants of islands to those of the nearest
mainland—On colonisation from the nearest source with subsequent
modification—Summary of the last and present chapter.

CHAPTER XIV.
MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS:
MORPHOLOGY: EMBRYOLOGY: RUDIMENTARY ORGANS.
Classification, groups subordinate to groups—Natural system—Rules and
difficulties in classification, explained on the theory of descent with
modification—Classification of varieties—Descent always used in
classification—Analogical or adaptive characters—Affinities, general,
complex and radiating—Extinction separates and defines
groups—Morphology, between members of the same class, between parts of
the same individual—Embryology, laws of, explained by variations not
supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding
age—Rudimentary Organs; their origin explained—Summary.

CHAPTER XV.
RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION.
Recapitulation of the objections to the theory of Natural
Selection—Recapitulation of the general and special circumstances in
its favour—Causes of the general belief in the immutability of
species—How far the theory of Natural Selection may be extended—Effects
of its adoption on the study of Natural history—Concluding remarks.

GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC TERMS.

INDEX.

ORIGIN OF SPECIES.

INTRODUCTION.

When on board H.M.S. Beagle, as naturalist, I was much struck with
certain facts in the distribution of the organic beings inhabiting
South America, and in the geological relations of the present to the
past inhabitants of that continent. These facts, as will be seen in the
latter chapters of this volume, seemed to throw some light on the
origin of species—that mystery of mysteries, as it has been called by
one of our greatest philosophers. On my return home, it occurred to me,
in 1837, that something might perhaps be made out on this question by
patiently accumulating and reflecting on all sorts of facts which could
possibly have any bearing on it. After five years’ work I allowed
myself to speculate on the subject, and drew up some short notes; these
I enlarged in 1844 into a sketch of the conclusions, which then seemed
to me probable: from that period to the present day I have steadily
pursued the same object. I hope that I may be excused for entering on
these personal details, as I give them to show that I have not been
hasty in coming to a decision.

My work is now (1859) nearly finished; but as it will take me many more
years to complete it, and as my health is far from strong, I have been
urged to publish this abstract. I have more especially been induced to
do this, as Mr. Wallace, who is now studying the natural history of the
Malay Archipelago, has arrived at almost exactly the same general
conclusions that I have on the origin of species. In 1858 he sent me a
memoir on this subject, with a request that I would forward it to Sir
Charles Lyell, who sent it to the Linnean Society, and it is published
in the third volume of the Journal of that Society. Sir C. Lyell and
Dr. Hooker, who both knew of my work—the latter having read my sketch
of 1844—honoured me by thinking it advisable to publish, with Mr.
Wallace’s excellent memoir, some brief extracts from my manuscripts.

This abstract, which I now publish, must necessarily be imperfect. I
cannot here give references and authorities for my several statements;
and I must trust to the reader reposing some confidence in my accuracy.
No doubt errors may have crept in, though I hope I have always been
cautious in trusting to good authorities alone. I can here give only
the general conclusions at which I have arrived, with a few facts in
illustration, but which, I hope, in most cases will suffice. No one can
feel more sensible than I do of the necessity of hereafter publishing
in detail all the facts, with references, on which my conclusions have
been grounded; and I hope in a future work to do this. For I am well
aware that scarcely a single point is discussed in this volume on which
facts cannot be adduced, often apparently leading to conclusions
directly opposite to those at which I have arrived. A fair result can
be obtained only by fully stating and balancing the facts and arguments
on both sides of each question; and this is here impossible.

I much regret that want of space prevents my having the satisfaction of
acknowledging the generous assistance which I have received from very
many naturalists, some of them personally unknown to me. I cannot,
however, let this opportunity pass without expressing my deep
obligations to Dr. Hooker, who, for the last fifteen years, has aided
me in every possible way by his large stores of knowledge and his
excellent judgment.

In considering the origin of species, it is quite conceivable that a
naturalist, reflecting on the mutual affinities of organic beings, on
their embryological relations, their geographical distribution,
geological succession, and other such facts, might come to the
conclusion that species had not been independently created, but had
descended, like varieties, from other species. Nevertheless, such a
conclusion, even if well founded, would be unsatisfactory, until it
could be shown how the innumerable species, inhabiting this world have
been modified, so as to acquire that perfection of structure and
coadaptation which justly excites our admiration. Naturalists
continually refer to external conditions, such as climate, food, &c.,
as the only possible cause of variation. In one limited sense, as we
shall hereafter see, this may be true; but it is preposterous to
attribute to mere external conditions, the structure, for instance, of
the woodpecker, with its feet, tail, beak, and tongue, so admirably
adapted to catch insects under the bark of trees. In the case of the
mistletoe, which draws its nourishment from certain trees, which has
seeds that must be transported by certain birds, and which has flowers
with separate sexes absolutely requiring the agency of certain insects
to bring pollen from one flower to the other, it is equally
preposterous to account for the structure of this parasite, with its
relations to several distinct organic beings, by the effects of
external conditions, or of habit, or of the volition of the plant
itself.

It is, therefore, of the highest importance to gain a clear insight
into the means of modification and coadaptation. At the commencement of
my observations it seemed to me probable that a careful study of
domesticated animals and of cultivated plants would offer the best
chance of making out this obscure problem. Nor have I been
disappointed; in this and in all other perplexing cases I have
invariably found that our knowledge, imperfect though it be, of
variation under domestication, afforded the best and safest clue. I may
venture to express my conviction of the high value of such studies,
although they have been very commonly neglected by naturalists.

From these considerations, I shall devote the first chapter of this
abstract to variation under domestication. We shall thus see that a
large amount of hereditary modification is at least possible; and, what
is equally or more important, we shall see how great is the power of
man in accumulating by his selection successive slight variations. I
will then pass on to the variability of species in a state of nature;
but I shall, unfortunately, be compelled to treat this subject far too
briefly, as it can be treated properly only by giving long catalogues
of facts. We shall, however, be enabled to discuss what circumstances
are most favourable to variation. In the next chapter the struggle for
existence among all organic beings throughout the world, which
inevitably follows from the high geometrical ratio of their increase,
will be considered. This is the doctrine of Malthus, applied to the
whole animal and vegetable kingdoms. As many more individuals of each
species are born than can possibly survive; and as, consequently, there
is a frequently recurring struggle for existence, it follows that any
being, if it vary however slightly in any manner profitable to itself,
under the complex and sometimes varying conditions of life, will have a
better chance of surviving, and thus be _naturally selected_. From the
strong principle of inheritance, any selected variety will tend to
propagate its new and modified form.

This fundamental subject of natural selection will be treated at some
length in the fourth chapter; and we shall then see how natural
selection almost inevitably causes much extinction of the less improved
forms of life, and leads to what I have called divergence of character.
In the next chapter I shall discuss the complex and little known laws
of variation. In the five succeeding chapters, the most apparent and
gravest difficulties in accepting the theory will be given: namely,
first, the difficulties of transitions, or how a simple being or a
simple organ can be changed and perfected into a highly developed being
or into an elaborately constructed organ; secondly the subject of
instinct, or the mental powers of animals; thirdly, hybridism, or the
infertility of species and the fertility of varieties when
intercrossed; and fourthly, the imperfection of the geological record.
In the next chapter I shall consider the geological succession of
organic beings throughout time; in the twelfth and thirteenth, their
geographical distribution throughout space; in the fourteenth, their
classification or mutual affinities, both when mature and in an
embryonic condition. In the last chapter I shall give a brief
recapitulation of the whole work, and a few concluding remarks.

No one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as yet unexplained in
regard to the origin of species and varieties, if he make due allowance
for our profound ignorance in regard to the mutual relations of the
many beings which live around us. Who can explain why one species
ranges widely and is very numerous, and why another allied species has
a narrow range and is rare? Yet these relations are of the highest
importance, for they determine the present welfare and, as I believe,
the future success and modification of every inhabitant of this world.
Still less do we know of the mutual relations of the innumerable
inhabitants of the world during the many past geological epochs in its
history. Although much remains obscure, and will long remain obscure, I
can entertain no doubt, after the most deliberate study and
dispassionate judgment of which I am capable, that the view which most
naturalists until recently entertained, and which I formerly
entertained—namely, that each species has been independently created—is
erroneous. I am fully convinced that species are not immutable; but
that those belonging to what are called the same genera are lineal
descendants of some other and generally extinct species, in the same
manner as the acknowledged varieties of any one species are the
descendants of that species. Furthermore, I am convinced that natural
selection has been the most important, but not the exclusive, means of
modification.

CHAPTER I.
VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION.

Causes of Variability—Effects of Habit and the use and disuse of
Parts—Correlated Variation—Inheritance—Character of Domestic
Varieties—Difficulty of distinguishing between Varieties and
Species—Origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more Species—Domestic
Pigeons, their Differences and Origin—Principles of Selection,
anciently followed, their Effects—Methodical and Unconscious
Selection—Unknown Origin of our Domestic Productions—Circumstances
favourable to Man’s power of Selection.

_Causes of Variability._

When we compare the individuals of the same variety or sub-variety of
our older cultivated plants and animals, one of the first points which
strikes us is, that they generally differ more from each other than do
the individuals of any one species or variety in a state of nature. And
if we reflect on the vast diversity of the plants and animals which
have been cultivated, and which have varied during all ages under the
most different climates and treatment, we are driven to conclude that
this great variability is due to our domestic productions having been
raised under conditions of life not so uniform as, and somewhat
different from, those to which the parent species had been exposed
under nature. There is, also, some probability in the view propounded
by Andrew Knight, that this variability may be partly connected with
excess of food. It seems clear that organic beings must be exposed
during several generations to new conditions to cause any great amount
of variation; and that, when the organisation has once begun to vary,
it generally continues varying for many generations. No case is on
record of a variable organism ceasing to vary under cultivation. Our
oldest cultivated plants, such as wheat, still yield new varieties: our
oldest domesticated animals are still capable of rapid improvement or
modification.

As far as I am able to judge, after long attending to the subject, the
conditions of life appear to act in two ways—directly on the whole
organisation or on certain parts alone and in directly by affecting the
reproductive system. With respect to the direct action, we must bear in
mind that in every case, as Professor Weismann has lately insisted, and
as I have incidently shown in my work on “Variation under
Domestication,” there are two factors: namely, the nature of the
organism and the nature of the conditions. The former seems to be much
the more important; for nearly similar variations sometimes arise
under, as far as we can judge, dissimilar conditions; and, on the other
hand, dissimilar variations arise under conditions which appear to be
nearly uniform. The effects on the offspring are either definite or in
definite. They may be considered as definite when all or nearly all the
offspring of individuals exposed to certain conditions during several
generations are modified in the same manner. It is extremely difficult
to come to any conclusion in regard to the extent of the changes which
have been thus definitely induced. There can, however, be little doubt
about many slight changes, such as size from the amount of food, colour
from the nature of the food, thickness of the skin and hair from
climate, &c. Each of the endless variations which we see in the plumage
of our fowls must have had some efficient cause; and if the same cause
were to act uniformly during a long series of generations on many
individuals, all probably would be modified in the same manner. Such
facts as the complex and extraordinary out growths which variably
follow from the insertion of a minute drop of poison by a
gall-producing insect, shows us what singular modifications might
result in the case of plants from a chemical change in the nature of
the sap.

In definite variability is a much more common result of changed
conditions than definite variability, and has probably played a more
important part in the formation of our domestic races. We see in
definite variability in the endless slight peculiarities which
distinguish the individuals of the same species, and which cannot be
accounted for by inheritance from either parent or from some more
remote ancestor. Even strongly-marked differences occasionally appear
in the young of the same litter, and in seedlings from the same
seed-capsule. At long intervals of time, out of millions of individuals
reared in the same country and fed on nearly the same food, deviations
of structure so strongly pronounced as to deserve to be called
monstrosities arise; but monstrosities cannot be separated by any
distinct line from slighter variations. All such changes of structure,
whether extremely slight or strongly marked, which appear among many
individuals living together, may be considered as the in definite
effects of the conditions of life on each individual organism, in
nearly the same manner as the chill effects different men in an in
definite manner, according to their state of body or constitution,
causing coughs or colds, rheumatism, or inflammation of various organs.

With respect to what I have called the in direct action of changed
conditions, namely, through the reproductive system of being affected,
we may infer that variability is thus induced, partly from the fact of
this system being extremely sensitive to any change in the conditions,
and partly from the similarity, as Kölreuter and others have remarked,
between the variability which follows from the crossing of distinct
species, and that which may be observed with plants and animals when
reared under new or unnatural conditions. Many facts clearly show how
eminently susceptible the reproductive system is to very slight changes
in the surrounding conditions. Nothing is more easy than to tame an
animal, and few things more difficult than to get it to breed freely
under confinement, even when the male and female unite. How many
animals there are which will not breed, though kept in an almost free
state in their native country! This is generally, but erroneously
attributed to vitiated instincts. Many cultivated plants display the
utmost vigour, and yet rarely or never seed! In some few cases it has
been discovered that a very trifling change, such as a little more or
less water at some particular period of growth, will determine whether
or not a plant will produce seeds. I cannot here give the details which
I have collected and elsewhere published on this curious subject; but
to show how singular the laws are which determine the reproduction of
animals under confinement, I may mention that carnivorous animals, even
from the tropics, breed in this country pretty freely under
confinement, with the exception of the plantigrades or bear family,
which seldom produce young; whereas, carnivorous birds, with the rarest
exception, hardly ever lay fertile eggs. Many exotic plants have pollen
utterly worthless, in the same condition as in the most sterile
hybrids. When, on the one hand, we see domesticated animals and plants,
though often weak and sickly, breeding freely under confinement; and
when, on the other hand, we see individuals, though taken young from a
state of nature perfectly tamed, long-lived, and healthy (of which I
could give numerous instances), yet having their reproductive system so
seriously affected by unperceived causes as to fail to act, we need not
be surprised at this system, when it does act under confinement, acting
irregularly, and producing offspring somewhat unlike their parents. I
may add that as some organisms breed freely under the most unnatural
conditions—for instance, rabbits and ferrets kept in hutches—showing
that their reproductive organs are not easily affected; so will some
animals and plants withstand domestication or cultivation, and vary
very slightly—perhaps hardly more than in a state of nature.

Some naturalists have maintained that all variations are connected with
the act of sexual reproduction; but this is certainly an error; for I
have given in another work a long list of “sporting plants;” as they
are called by gardeners; that is, of plants which have suddenly
produced a single bud with a new and sometimes widely different
character from that of the other buds on the same plant. These bud
variations, as they may be named, can be propagated by grafts, offsets,
&c., and sometimes by seed. They occur rarely under nature, but are far
from rare under culture. As a single bud out of many thousands produced
year after year on the same tree under uniform conditions, has been
known suddenly to assume a new character; and as buds on distinct
trees, growing under different conditions, have sometimes yielded
nearly the same variety—for instance, buds on peach-trees producing
nectarines, and buds on common roses producing moss-roses—we clearly
see that the nature of the conditions is of subordinate importance in
comparison with the nature of the organism in determining each
particular form of variation; perhaps of not more importance than the
nature of the spark, by which a mass of combustible matter is ignited,
has in determining the nature of the flames.

_Effects of Habit and of the Use or Disuse of Parts; Correlated
Variation; Inheritance._

Changed habits produce an inherited effect as in the period of the
flowering of plants when transported from one climate to another. With
animals the increased use or disuse of parts has had a more marked
influence; thus I find in the domestic duck that the bones of the wing
weigh less and the bones of the leg more, in proportion to the whole
skeleton, than do the same bones in the wild duck; and this change may
be safely attributed to the domestic duck flying much less, and walking
more, than its wild parents. The great and inherited development of the
udders in cows and goats in countries where they are habitually milked,
in comparison with these organs in other countries, is probably another
instance of the effects of use. Not one of our domestic animals can be
named which has not in some country drooping ears; and the view which
has been suggested that the drooping is due to disuse of the muscles of
the ear, from the animals being seldom much alarmed, seems probable.

Many laws regulate variation, some few of which can be dimly seen, and
will hereafter be briefly discussed. I will here only allude to what
may be called correlated variation. Important changes in the embryo or
larva will probably entail changes in the mature animal. In
monstrosities, the correlations between quite distinct parts are very
curious; and many instances are given in Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire’s
great work on this subject. Breeders believe that long limbs are almost
always accompanied by an elongated head. Some instances of correlation
are quite whimsical; thus cats which are entirely white and have blue
eyes are generally deaf; but it has been lately stated by Mr. Tait that
this is confined to the males. Colour and constitutional peculiarities
go together, of which many remarkable cases could be given among
animals and plants. From facts collected by Heusinger, it appears that
white sheep and pigs are injured by certain plants, while dark-coloured
individuals escape: Professor Wyman has recently communicated to me a
good illustration of this fact; on asking some farmers in Virginia how
it was that all their pigs were black, they informed him that the pigs
ate the paint-root (Lachnanthes), which coloured their bones pink, and
which caused the hoofs of all but the black varieties to drop off; and
one of the “crackers” (_i.e._ Virginia squatters) added, “we select the
black members of a litter for raising, as they alone have a good chance
of living.” Hairless dogs have imperfect teeth; long-haired and
coarse-haired animals are apt to have, as is asserted, long or many
horns; pigeons with feathered feet have skin between their outer toes;
pigeons with short beaks have small feet, and those with long beaks
large feet. Hence if man goes on selecting, and thus augmenting, any
peculiarity, he will almost certainly modify unintentionally other
parts of the structure, owing to the mysterious laws of correlation.

The results of the various, unknown, or but dimly understood laws of
variation are infinitely complex and diversified. It is well worth
while carefully to study the several treatises on some of our old
cultivated plants, as on the hyacinth, potato, even the dahlia, &c.;
and it is really surprising to note the endless points of structure and
constitution in which the varieties and sub-varieties differ slightly
from each other. The whole organisation seems to have become plastic,
and departs in a slight degree from that of the parental type.

Any variation which is not inherited is unimportant for us. But the
number and diversity of inheritable deviations of structure, both those
of slight and those of considerable physiological importance, are
endless. Dr. Prosper Lucas’ treatise, in two large volumes, is the
fullest and the best on this subject. No breeder doubts how strong is
the tendency to inheritance; that like produces like is his fundamental
belief: doubts have been thrown on this principle only by theoretical
writers. When any deviation of structure often appears, and we see it
in the father and child, we cannot tell whether it may not be due to
the same cause having acted on both; but when among individuals,
apparently exposed to the same conditions, any very rare deviation, due
to some extraordinary combination of circumstances, appears in the
parent—say, once among several million individuals—and it reappears in
the child, the mere doctrine of chances almost compels us to attribute
its reappearance to inheritance. Every one must have heard of cases of
albinism, prickly skin, hairy bodies, &c., appearing in several members
of the same family. If strange and rare deviations of structure are
truly inherited, less strange and commoner deviations may be freely
admitted to be inheritable. Perhaps the correct way of viewing the
whole subject would be, to look at the inheritance of every character
whatever as the rule, and non-inheritance as the anomaly.

The laws governing inheritance are for the most part unknown; no one
can say why the same peculiarity in different individuals of the same
species, or in different species, is sometimes inherited and sometimes
not so; why the child often reverts in certain characteristics to its
grandfather or grandmother or more remote ancestor; why a peculiarity
is often transmitted from one sex to both sexes, or to one sex alone,
more commonly but not exclusively to the like sex. It is a fact of some
importance to us, that peculiarities appearing in the males of our
domestic breeds are often transmitted, either exclusively or in a much
greater degree, to the males alone. A much more important rule, which I
think may be trusted, is that, at whatever period of life a peculiarity
first appears, it tends to reappear in the offspring at a corresponding
age, though sometimes earlier. In many cases this could not be
otherwise; thus the inherited peculiarities in the horns of cattle
could appear only in the offspring when nearly mature; peculiarities in
the silk-worm are known to appear at the corresponding caterpillar or
cocoon stage. But hereditary diseases and some other facts make me
believe that the rule has a wider extension, and that, when there is no
apparent reason why a peculiarity should appear at any particular age,
yet that it does tend to appear in the offspring at the same period at
which it first appeared in the parent. I believe this rule to be of the
highest importance in explaining the laws of embryology. These remarks
are of course confined to the first _appearance_ of the peculiarity,
and not to the primary cause which may have acted on the ovules or on
the male element; in nearly the same manner as the increased length of
the horns in the offspring from a short-horned cow by a long-horned
bull, though appearing late in life, is clearly due to the male
element.

Having alluded to the subject of reversion, I may here refer to a
statement often made by naturalists—namely, that our domestic
varieties, when run wild, gradually but invariably revert in character
to their aboriginal stocks. Hence it has been argued that no deductions
can be drawn from domestic races to species in a state of nature. I
have in vain endeavoured to discover on what decisive facts the above
statement has so often and so boldly been made. There would be great
difficulty in proving its truth: we may safely conclude that very many
of the most strongly marked domestic varieties could not possibly live
in a wild state. In many cases we do not know what the aboriginal stock
was, and so could not tell whether or not nearly perfect reversion had
ensued. It would be necessary, in order to prevent the effects of
intercrossing, that only a single variety should be turned loose in its
new home. Nevertheless, as our varieties certainly do occasionally
revert in some of their characters to ancestral forms, it seems to me
not improbable that if we could succeed in naturalising, or were to
cultivate, during many generations, the several races, for instance, of
the cabbage, in very poor soil—in which case, however, some effect
would have to be attributed to the _definite_ action of the poor
soil—that they would, to a large extent, or even wholly, revert to the
wild aboriginal stock. Whether or not the experiment would succeed is
not of great importance for our line of argument; for by the experiment
itself the conditions of life are changed. If it could be shown that
our domestic varieties manifested a strong tendency to reversion—that
is, to lose their acquired characters, while kept under the same
conditions and while kept in a considerable body, so that free
intercrossing might check, by blending together, any slight deviations
in their structure, in such case, I grant that we could deduce nothing
from domestic varieties in regard to species. But there is not a shadow
of evidence in favour of this view: to assert that we could not breed
our cart and race-horses, long and short-horned cattle, and poultry of
various breeds, and esculent vegetables, for an unlimited number of
generations, would be opposed to all experience.

_Character of Domestic Varieties; difficulty of distinguishing between
Varieties and Species; origin of Domestic Varieties from one or more
Species._

When we look to the hereditary varieties or races of our domestic
animals and plants, and compare them with closely allied species, we
generally perceive in each domestic race, as already remarked, less
uniformity of character than in true species. Domestic races often have
a somewhat monstrous character; by which I mean, that, although
differing from each other and from other species of the same genus, in
several trifling respects, they often differ in an extreme degree in
some one part, both when compared one with another, and more especially
when compared with the species under nature to which they are nearest
allied. With these exceptions (and with that of the perfect fertility
of varieties when crossed—a subject hereafter to be discussed),
domestic races of the same species differ from each other in the same
manner as do the closely allied species of the same genus in a state of
nature, but the differences in most cases are less in degree. This must
be admitted as true, for the domestic races of many animals and plants
have been ranked by some competent judges as the descendants of
aboriginally distinct species, and by other competent judges as mere
varieties. If any well marked distinction existed between a domestic
race and a species, this source of doubt would not so perpetually
recur. It has often been stated that domestic races do not differ from
each other in characters of generic value. It can be shown that this
statement is not correct; but naturalists differ much in determining
what characters are of generic value; all such valuations being at
present empirical. When it is explained how genera originate under
nature, it will be seen that we have no right to expect often to find a
generic amount of difference in our domesticated races.

In attempting to estimate the amount of structural difference between
allied domestic races, we are soon involved in doubt, from not knowing
whether they are descended from one or several parent species. This
point, if it could be cleared up, would be interesting; if, for
instance, it could be shown that the greyhound, bloodhound, terrier,
spaniel and bull-dog, which we all know propagate their kind truly,
were the offspring of any single species, then such facts would have
great weight in making us doubt about the immutability of the many
closely allied natural species—for instance, of the many
foxes—inhabiting the different quarters of the world. I do not believe,
as we shall presently see, that the whole amount of difference between
the several breeds of the dog has been produced under domestication; I
believe that a small part of the difference is due to their being
descended from distinct species. In the case of strongly marked races
of some other domesticated species, there is presumptive or even strong
evidence that all are descended from a single wild stock.

It has often been assumed that man has chosen for domestication animals
and plants having an extraordinary inherent tendency to vary, and
likewise to withstand diverse climates. I do not dispute that these
capacities have added largely to the value of most of our domesticated
productions; but how could a savage possibly know, when he first tamed
an animal, whether it would vary in succeeding generations, and whether
it would endure other climates? Has the little variability of the ass
and goose, or the small power of endurance of warmth by the reindeer,
or of cold by the common camel, prevented their domestication? I cannot
doubt that if other animals and plants, equal in number to our
domesticated productions, and belonging to equally diverse classes and
countries, were taken from a state of nature, and could be made to
breed for an equal number of generations under domestication, they
would on an average vary as largely as the parent species of our
existing domesticated productions have varied.

In the case of most of our anciently domesticated animals and plants,
it is not possible to come to any definite conclusion, whether they are
descended from one or several wild species. The argument mainly relied
on by those who believe in the multiple origin of our domestic animals
is, that we find in the most ancient times, on the monuments of Egypt,
and in the lake-habitations of Switzerland, much diversity in the
breeds; and that some of these ancient breeds closely resemble, or are
even identical with, those still existing. But this only throws far
backward the history of civilisation, and shows that animals were
domesticated at a much earlier period than has hitherto been supposed.
The lake-inhabitants of Switzerland cultivated several kinds of wheat
and barley, the pea, the poppy for oil and flax; and they possessed
several domesticated animals. They also carried on commerce with other
nations. All this clearly shows, as Heer has remarked, that they had at
this early age progressed considerably in civilisation; and this again
implies a long continued previous period of less advanced civilisation,
during which the domesticated animals, kept by different tribes in
different districts, might have varied and given rise to distinct
races. Since the discovery of flint tools in the superficial formations
of many parts of the world, all geologists believe that barbarian men
existed at an enormously remote period; and we know that at the present
day there is hardly a tribe so barbarous as not to have domesticated at
least the dog.

The origin of most of our domestic animals will probably forever remain
vague. But I may here state that, looking to the domestic dogs of the
whole world, I have, after a laborious collection of all known facts,
come to the conclusion that several wild species of Canidæ have been
tamed, and that their blood, in some cases mingled together, flows in
the veins of our domestic breeds. In regard to sheep and goats I can
form no decided opinion. From facts communicated to me by Mr. Blyth, on
the habits, voice, constitution and structure of the humped Indian
cattle, it is almost certain that they are descended from a different
aboriginal stock from our European cattle; and some competent judges
believe that these latter have had two or three wild progenitors,
whether or not these deserve to be called species. This conclusion, as
well as that of the specific distinction between the humped and common
cattle, may, indeed, be looked upon as established by the admirable
researches of Professor Rütimeyer. With respect to horses, from reasons
which I cannot here give, I am doubtfully inclined to believe, in
opposition to several authors, that all the races belong to the same
species. Having kept nearly all the English breeds of the fowl alive,
having bred and crossed them, and examined their skeletons, it appears
to me almost certain that all are the descendants of the wild Indian
fowl, Gallus bankiva; and this is the conclusion of Mr. Blyth, and of
others who have studied this bird in India. In regard to ducks and
rabbits, some breeds of which differ much from each other, the evidence
is clear that they are all descended from the common duck and wild
rabbit.

The doctrine of the origin of our several domestic races from several
aboriginal stocks, has been carried to an absurd extreme by some
authors. They believe that every race which breeds true, let the
distinctive characters be ever so slight, has had its wild prototype.
At this rate there must have existed at least a score of species of
wild cattle, as many sheep, and several goats, in Europe alone, and
several even within Great Britain. One author believes that there
formerly existed eleven wild species of sheep peculiar to Great
Britain! When we bear in mind that Britain has now not one peculiar
mammal, and France but few distinct from those of Germany, and so with
Hungary, Spain, &c., but that each of these kingdoms possesses several
peculiar breeds of cattle, sheep, &c., we must admit that many domestic
breeds must have originated in Europe; for whence otherwise could they
have been derived? So it is in India. Even in the case of the breeds of
the domestic dog throughout the world, which I admit are descended from
several wild species, it cannot be doubted that there has been an
immense amount of inherited variation; for who will believe that
animals closely resembling the Italian greyhound, the bloodhound, the
bull-dog, pug-dog, or Blenheim spaniel, &c.—so unlike all wild
Canidæ—ever existed in a state of nature? It has often been loosely
said that all our races of dogs have been produced by the crossing of a
few aboriginal species; but by crossing we can only get forms in some
degree intermediate between their parents; and if we account for our
several domestic races by this process, we must admit the former
existence of the most extreme forms, as the Italian greyhound,
bloodhound, bull-dog, &c., in the wild state. Moreover, the possibility
of making distinct races by crossing has been greatly exaggerated. Many
cases are on record showing that a race may be modified by occasional
crosses if aided by the careful selection of the individuals which
present the desired character; but to obtain a race intermediate
between two quite distinct races would be very difficult. Sir J.
Sebright expressly experimented with this object and failed. The
offspring from the first cross between two pure breeds is tolerably and
sometimes (as I have found with pigeons) quite uniform in character,
and every thing seems simple enough; but when these mongrels are
crossed one with another for several generations, hardly two of them
are alike, and then the difficulty of the task becomes manifest.

_Breeds of the Domestic Pigeon, their Differences and Origin._

Believing that it is always best to study some special group, I have,
after deliberation, taken up domestic pigeons. I have kept every breed
which I could purchase or obtain, and have been most kindly favoured
with skins from several quarters of the world, more especially by the
Hon. W. Elliot from India, and by the Hon. C. Murray from Persia. Many
treatises in different languages have been published on pigeons, and
some of them are very important, as being of considerable antiquity. I
have associated with several eminent fanciers, and have been permitted
to join two of the London Pigeon Clubs. The diversity of the breeds is
something astonishing. Compare the English carrier and the short-faced
tumbler, and see the wonderful difference in their beaks, entailing
corresponding differences in their skulls. The carrier, more especially
the male bird, is also remarkable from the wonderful development of the
carunculated skin about the head, and this is accompanied by greatly
elongated eyelids, very large external orifices to the nostrils, and a
wide gape of mouth. The short-faced tumbler has a beak in outline
almost like that of a finch; and the common tumbler has the singular
inherited habit of flying at a great height in a compact flock, and
tumbling in the air head over heels. The runt is a bird of great size,
with long, massive beak and large feet; some of the sub-breeds of runts
have very long necks, others very long wings and tails, others
singularly short tails. The barb is allied to the carrier, but, instead
of a long beak, has a very short and broad one. The pouter has a much
elongated body, wings, and legs; and its enormously developed crop,
which it glories in inflating, may well excite astonishment and even
laughter. The turbit has a short and conical beak, with a line of
reversed feathers down the breast; and it has the habit of continually
expanding, slightly, the upper part of the œsophagus. The Jacobin has
the feathers so much reversed along the back of the neck that they form
a hood, and it has, proportionally to its size, elongated wing and tail
feathers. The trumpeter and laugher, as their names express, utter a
very different coo from the other breeds. The fantail has thirty or
even forty tail-feathers, instead of twelve or fourteen, the normal
number in all the members of the great pigeon family: these feathers
are kept expanded and are carried so erect that in good birds the head
and tail touch: the oil-gland is quite aborted. Several other less
distinct breeds might be specified.

In the skeletons of the several breeds, the development of the bones of
the face, in length and breadth and curvature, differs enormously. The
shape, as well as the breadth and length of the ramus of the lower jaw,
varies in a highly remarkable manner. The caudal and sacral vertebræ
vary in number; as does the number of the ribs, together with their
relative breadth and the presence of processes. The size and shape of
the apertures in the sternum are highly variable; so is the degree of
divergence and relative size of the two arms of the furcula. The
proportional width of the gape of mouth, the proportional length of the
eyelids, of the orifice of the nostrils, of the tongue (not always in
strict correlation with the length of beak), the size of the crop and
of the upper part of the œsophagus; the development and abortion of the
oil-gland; the number of the primary wing and caudal feathers; the
relative length of the wing and tail to each other and to the body; the
relative length of the leg and foot; the number of scutellæ on the
toes, the development of skin between the toes, are all points of
structure which are variable. The period at which the perfect plumage
is acquired varies, as does the state of the down with which the
nestling birds are clothed when hatched. The shape and size of the eggs
vary. The manner of flight, and in some breeds the voice and
disposition, differ remarkably. Lastly, in certain breeds, the males
and females have come to differ in a slight degree from each other.

Altogether at least a score of pigeons might be chosen, which, if shown
to an ornithologist, and he were told that they were wild birds, would
certainly be ranked by him as well-defined species. Moreover, I do not
believe that any ornithologist would in this case place the English
carrier, the short-faced tumbler, the runt, the barb, pouter, and
fantail in the same genus; more especially as in each of these breeds
several truly-inherited sub-breeds, or species, as he would call them,
could be shown him.

Great as are the differences between the breeds of the pigeon, I am
fully convinced that the common opinion of naturalists is correct,
namely, that all are descended from the rock-pigeon (Columba livia),
including under this term several geographical races or sub-species,
which differ from each other in the most trifling respects. As several
of the reasons which have led me to this belief are in some degree
applicable in other cases, I will here briefly give them. If the
several breeds are not varieties, and have not proceeded from the
rock-pigeon, they must have descended from at least seven or eight
aboriginal stocks; for it is impossible to make the present domestic
breeds by the crossing of any lesser number: how, for instance, could a
pouter be produced by crossing two breeds unless one of the
parent-stocks possessed the characteristic enormous crop? The supposed
aboriginal stocks must all have been rock-pigeons, that is, they did
not breed or willingly perch on trees. But besides C. livia, with its
geographical sub-species, only two or three other species of
rock-pigeons are known; and these have not any of the characters of the
domestic breeds. Hence the supposed aboriginal stocks must either still
exist in the countries where they were originally domesticated, and yet
be unknown to ornithologists; and this, considering their size, habits
and remarkable characters, seems improbable; or they must have become
extinct in the wild state. But birds breeding on precipices, and good
flyers, are unlikely to be exterminated; and the common rock-pigeon,
which has the same habits with the domestic breeds, has not been
exterminated even on several of the smaller British islets, or on the
shores of the Mediterranean. Hence the supposed extermination of so
many species having similar habits with the rock-pigeon seems a very
rash assumption. Moreover, the several above-named domesticated breeds
have been transported to all parts of the world, and, therefore, some
of them must have been carried back again into their native country;
but not one has become wild or feral, though the dovecot-pigeon, which
is the rock-pigeon in a very slightly altered state, has become feral
in several places. Again, all recent experience shows that it is
difficult to get wild animals to breed freely under domestication; yet
on the hypothesis of the multiple origin of our pigeons, it must be
assumed that at least seven or eight species were so thoroughly
domesticated in ancient times by half-civilized man, as to be quite
prolific under confinement.

An argument of great weight, and applicable in several other cases, is,
that the above-specified breeds, though agreeing generally with the
wild rock-pigeon in constitution, habits, voice, colouring, and in most
parts of their structure, yet are certainly highly abnormal in other
parts; we may look in vain through the whole great family of Columbidæ
for a beak like that of the English carrier, or that of the short-faced
tumbler, or barb; for reversed feathers like those of the Jacobin; for
a crop like that of the pouter; for tail-feathers like those of the
fantail. Hence it must be assumed, not only that half-civilized man
succeeded in thoroughly domesticating several species, but that he
intentionally or by chance picked out extraordinarily abnormal species;
and further, that these very species have since all become extinct or
unknown. So many strange contingencies are improbable in the highest
degree.

Some facts in regard to the colouring of pigeons well deserve
consideration. The rock-pigeon is of a slaty-blue, with white loins;
but the Indian sub-species, C. intermedia of Strickland, has this part
bluish. The tail has a terminal dark bar, with the outer feathers
externally edged at the base with white. The wings have two black bars.
Some semi-domestic breeds, and some truly wild breeds, have, besides
the two black bars, the wings chequered with black. These several marks
do not occur together in any other species of the whole family. Now, in
every one of the domestic breeds, taking thoroughly well-bred birds,
all the above marks, even to the white edging of the outer
tail-feathers, sometimes concur perfectly developed. Moreover, when
birds belonging to two or more distinct breeds are crossed, none of
which are blue or have any of the above-specified marks, the mongrel
offspring are very apt suddenly to acquire these characters. To give
one instance out of several which I have observed: I crossed some white
fantails, which breed very true, with some black barbs—and it so
happens that blue varieties of barbs are so rare that I never heard of
an instance in England; and the mongrels were black, brown and mottled.
I also crossed a barb with a spot, which is a white bird with a red
tail and red spot on the forehead, and which notoriously breeds very
true; the mongrels were dusky and mottled. I then crossed one of the
mongrel barb-fantails with a mongrel barb-spot, and they produced a
bird of as beautiful a blue colour, with the white loins, double black
wing-bar, and barred and white-edged tail-feathers, as any wild
rock-pigeon! We can understand these facts, on the well-known principle
of reversion to ancestral characters, if all the domestic breeds are
descended from the rock-pigeon. But if we deny this, we must make one
of the two following highly improbable suppositions. Either, first,
that all the several imagined aboriginal stocks were coloured and
marked like the rock-pigeon, although no other existing species is thus
coloured and marked, so that in each separate breed there might be a
tendency to revert to the very same colours and markings. Or, secondly,
that each breed, even the purest, has within a dozen, or at most within
a score, of generations, been crossed by the rock-pigeon: I say within
a dozen or twenty generations, for no instance is known of crossed
descendants reverting to an ancestor of foreign blood, removed by a
greater number of generations. In a breed which has been crossed only
once the tendency to revert to any character derived from such a cross
will naturally become less and less, as in each succeeding generation
there will be less of the foreign blood; but when there has been no
cross, and there is a tendency in the breed to revert to a character
which was lost during some former generation, this tendency, for all
that we can see to the contrary, may be transmitted undiminished for an
indefinite number of generations. These two distinct cases of reversion
are often confounded together by those who have written on inheritance.

Lastly, the hybrids or mongrels from between all the breeds of the
pigeon are perfectly fertile, as I can state from my own observations,
purposely made, on the most distinct breeds. Now, hardly any cases have
been ascertained with certainty of hybrids from two quite distinct
species of animals being perfectly fertile. Some authors believe that
long-continued domestication eliminates this strong tendency to
sterility in species. From the history of the dog, and of some other
domestic animals, this conclusion is probably quite correct, if applied
to species closely related to each other. But to extend it so far as to
suppose that species, aboriginally as distinct as carriers, tumblers,
pouters, and fantails now are, should yield offspring perfectly
fertile, _inter se_, seems to me rash in the extreme.

From these several reasons, namely, the improbability of man having
formerly made seven or eight supposed species of pigeons to breed
freely under domestication—these supposed species being quite unknown
in a wild state, and their not having become anywhere feral—these
species presenting certain very abnormal characters, as compared with
all other Columbidæ, though so like the rock-pigeon in most other
respects—the occasional reappearance of the blue colour and various
black marks in all the breeds, both when kept pure and when crossed—and
lastly, the mongrel offspring being perfectly fertile—from these
several reasons, taken together, we may safely conclude that all our
domestic breeds are descended from the rock-pigeon or Columba livia
with its geographical sub-species.

In favour of this view, I may add, firstly, that the wild C. livia has
been found capable of domestication in Europe and in India; and that it
agrees in habits and in a great number of points of structure with all
the domestic breeds. Secondly, that although an English carrier or a
short-faced tumbler differs immensely in certain characters from the
rock-pigeon, yet that by comparing the several sub-breeds of these two
races, more especially those brought from distant countries, we can
make, between them and the rock-pigeon, an almost perfect series; so we
can in some other cases, but not with all the breeds. Thirdly, those
characters which are mainly distinctive of each breed are in each
eminently variable, for instance, the wattle and length of beak of the
carrier, the shortness of that of the tumbler, and the number of
tail-feathers in the fantail; and the explanation of this fact will be
obvious when we treat of selection. Fourthly, pigeons have been watched
and tended with the utmost care, and loved by many people. They have
been domesticated for thousands of years in several quarters of the
world; the earliest known record of pigeons is in the fifth Ægyptian
dynasty, about 3000 B.C., as was pointed out to me by Professor
Lepsius; but Mr. Birch informs me that pigeons are given in a bill of
fare in the previous dynasty. In the time of the Romans, as we hear
from Pliny, immense prices were given for pigeons; “nay, they are come
to this pass, that they can reckon up their pedigree and race.” Pigeons
were much valued by Akber Khan in India, about the year 1600; never
less than 20,000 pigeons were taken with the court. “The monarchs of
Iran and Turan sent him some very rare birds;” and, continues the
courtly historian, “His Majesty, by crossing the breeds, which method
was never practised before, has improved them astonishingly.” About
this same period the Dutch were as eager about pigeons as were the old
Romans. The paramount importance of these considerations in explaining
the immense amount of variation which pigeons have undergone, will
likewise be obvious when we treat of Selection. We shall then, also,
see how it is that the several breeds so often have a somewhat
monstrous character. It is also a most favourable circumstance for the
production of distinct breeds, that male and female pigeons can be
easily mated for life; and thus different breeds can be kept together
in the same aviary.

I have discussed the probable origin of domestic pigeons at some, yet
quite insufficient, length; because when I first kept pigeons and
watched the several kinds, well knowing how truly they breed, I felt
fully as much difficulty in believing that since they had been
domesticated they had all proceeded from a common parent, as any
naturalist could in coming to a similar conclusion in regard to the
many species of finches, or other groups of birds, in nature. One
circumstance has struck me much; namely, that nearly all the breeders
of the various domestic animals and the cultivators of plants, with
whom I have conversed, or whose treatises I have read, are firmly
convinced that the several breeds to which each has attended, are
descended from so many aboriginally distinct species. Ask, as I have
asked, a celebrated raiser of Hereford cattle, whether his cattle might
not have descended from Long-horns, or both from a common parent-stock,
and he will laugh you to scorn. I have never met a pigeon, or poultry,
or duck, or rabbit fancier, who was not fully convinced that each main
breed was descended from a distinct species. Van Mons, in his treatise
on pears and apples, shows how utterly he disbelieves that the several
sorts, for instance a Ribston-pippin or Codlin-apple, could ever have
proceeded from the seeds of the same tree. Innumerable other examples
could be given. The explanation, I think, is simple: from
long-continued study they are strongly impressed with the differences
between the several races; and though they well know that each race
varies slightly, for they win their prizes by selecting such slight
differences, yet they ignore all general arguments, and refuse to sum
up in their minds slight differences accumulated during many successive
generations. May not those naturalists who, knowing far less of the
laws of inheritance than does the breeder, and knowing no more than he
does of the intermediate links in the long lines of descent, yet admit
that many of our domestic races are descended from the same parents—may
they not learn a lesson of caution, when they deride the idea of
species in a state of nature being lineal descendants of other species?

_Principles of Selection anciently followed, and their Effects._

Let us now briefly consider the steps by which domestic races have been
produced, either from one or from several allied species. Some effect
may be attributed to the direct and definite action of the external
conditions of life, and some to habit; but he would be a bold man who
would account by such agencies for the differences between a dray and
race-horse, a greyhound and bloodhound, a carrier and tumbler pigeon.
One of the most remarkable features in our domesticated races is that
we see in them adaptation, not indeed to the animal’s or plant’s own
good, but to man’s use or fancy. Some variations useful to him have
probably arisen suddenly, or by one step; many botanists, for instance,
believe that the fuller’s teasel, with its hooks, which can not be
rivalled by any mechanical contrivance, is only a variety of the wild
Dipsacus; and this amount of change may have suddenly arisen in a
seedling. So it has probably been with the turnspit dog; and this is
known to have been the case with the ancon sheep. But when we compare
the dray-horse and race-horse, the dromedary and camel, the various
breeds of sheep fitted either for cultivated land or mountain pasture,
with the wool of one breed good for one purpose, and that of another
breed for another purpose; when we compare the many breeds of dogs,
each good for man in different ways; when we compare the game-cock, so
pertinacious in battle, with other breeds so little quarrelsome, with
“everlasting layers” which never desire to sit, and with the bantam so
small and elegant; when we compare the host of agricultural, culinary,
orchard, and flower-garden races of plants, most useful to man at
different seasons and for different purposes, or so beautiful in his
eyes, we must, I think, look further than to mere variability. We can
not suppose that all the breeds were suddenly produced as perfect and
as useful as we now see them; indeed, in many cases, we know that this
has not been their history. The key is man’s power of accumulative
selection: nature gives successive variations; man adds them up in
certain directions useful to him. In this sense he may be said to have
made for himself useful breeds.

The great power of this principle of selection is not hypothetical. It
is certain that several of our eminent breeders have, even within a
single lifetime, modified to a large extent their breeds of cattle and
sheep. In order fully to realise what they have done it is almost
necessary to read several of the many treatises devoted to this
subject, and to inspect the animals. Breeders habitually speak of an
animal’s organisation as something plastic, which they can model almost
as they please. If I had space I could quote numerous passages to this
effect from highly competent authorities. Youatt, who was probably
better acquainted with the works of agriculturalists than almost any
other individual, and who was himself a very good judge of animals,
speaks of the principle of selection as “that which enables the
agriculturist, not only to modify the character of his flock, but to
change it altogether. It is the magician’s wand, by means of which he
may summon into life whatever form and mould he pleases.” Lord
Somerville, speaking of what breeders have done for sheep, says: “It
would seem as if they had chalked out upon a wall a form perfect in
itself, and then had given it existence.” In Saxony the importance of
the principle of selection in regard to merino sheep is so fully
recognised, that men follow it as a trade: the sheep are placed on a
table and are studied, like a picture by a connoisseur; this is done
three times at intervals of months, and the sheep are each time marked
and classed, so that the very best may ultimately be selected for
breeding.

What English breeders have actually effected is proved by the enormous
prices given for animals with a good pedigree; and these have been
exported to almost every quarter of the world. The improvement is by no
means generally due to crossing different breeds; all the best breeders
are strongly opposed to this practice, except sometimes among closely
allied sub-breeds. And when a cross has been made, the closest
selection is far more indispensable even than in ordinary cases. If
selection consisted merely in separating some very distinct variety and
breeding from it, the principle would be so obvious as hardly to be
worth notice; but its importance consists in the great effect produced
by the accumulation in one direction, during successive generations, of
differences absolutely inappreciable by an uneducated eye—differences
which I for one have vainly attempted to appreciate. Not one man in a
thousand has accuracy of eye and judgment sufficient to become an
eminent breeder. If gifted with these qualities, and he studies his
subject for years, and devotes his lifetime to it with indomitable
perseverance, he will succeed, and may make great improvements; if he
wants any of these qualities, he will assuredly fail. Few would readily
believe in the natural capacity and years of practice requisite to
become even a skilful pigeon-fancier.

The same principles are followed by horticulturists; but the variations
are here often more abrupt. No one supposes that our choicest
productions have been produced by a single variation from the
aboriginal stock. We have proofs that this is not so in several cases
in which exact records have been kept; thus, to give a very trifling
instance, the steadily-increasing size of the common gooseberry may be
quoted. We see an astonishing improvement in many florists’ flowers,
when the flowers of the present day are compared with drawings made
only twenty or thirty years ago. When a race of plants is once pretty
well established, the seed-raisers do not pick out the best plants, but
merely go over their seed-beds, and pull up the “rogues,” as they call
the plants that deviate from the proper standard. With animals this
kind of selection is, in fact, likewise followed; for hardly any one is
so careless as to breed from his worst animals.

In regard to plants, there is another means of observing the
accumulated effects of selection—namely, by comparing the diversity of
flowers in the different varieties of the same species in the
flower-garden; the diversity of leaves, pods, or tubers, or whatever
part is valued, in the kitchen-garden, in comparison with the flowers
of the same varieties; and the diversity of fruit of the same species
in the orchard, in comparison with the leaves and flowers of the same
set of varieties. See how different the leaves of the cabbage are, and
how extremely alike the flowers; how unlike the flowers of the
heartsease are, and how alike the leaves; how much the fruit of the
different kinds of gooseberries differ in size, colour, shape, and
hairiness, and yet the flowers present very slight differences. It is
not that the varieties which differ largely in some one point do not
differ at all in other points; this is hardly ever—I speak after
careful observation—perhaps never, the case. The law of correlated
variation, the importance of which should never be overlooked, will
ensure some differences; but, as a general rule, it cannot be doubted
that the continued selection of slight variations, either in the
leaves, the flowers, or the fruit, will produce races differing from
each other chiefly in these characters.

It may be objected that the principle of selection has been reduced to
methodical practice for scarcely more than three-quarters of a century;
it has certainly been more attended to of late years, and many
treatises have been published on the subject; and the result has been,
in a corresponding degree, rapid and important. But it is very far from
true that the principle is a modern discovery. I could give several
references to works of high antiquity, in which the full importance of
the principle is acknowledged. In rude and barbarous periods of English
history choice animals were often imported, and laws were passed to
prevent their exportation: the destruction of horses under a certain
size was ordered, and this may be compared to the “roguing” of plants
by nurserymen. The principle of selection I find distinctly given in an
ancient Chinese encyclopædia. Explicit rules are laid down by some of
the Roman classical writers. From passages in Genesis, it is clear that
the colour of domestic animals was at that early period attended to.
Savages now sometimes cross their dogs with wild canine animals, to
improve the breed, and they formerly did so, as is attested by passages
in Pliny. The savages in South Africa match their draught cattle by
colour, as do some of the Esquimaux their teams of dogs. Livingstone
states that good domestic breeds are highly valued by the negroes in
the interior of Africa who have not associated with Europeans. Some of
these facts do not show actual selection, but they show that the
breeding of domestic animals was carefully attended to in ancient
times, and is now attended to by the lowest savages. It would, indeed,
have been a strange fact, had attention not been paid to breeding, for
the inheritance of good and bad qualities is so obvious.

_Unconscious Selection._

At the present time, eminent breeders try by methodical selection, with
a distinct object in view, to make a new strain or sub-breed, superior
to anything of the kind in the country. But, for our purpose, a form of
selection, which may be called unconscious, and which results from
every one trying to possess and breed from the best individual animals,
is more important. Thus, a man who intends keeping pointers naturally
tries to get as good dogs as he can, and afterwards breeds from his own
best dogs, but he has no wish or expectation of permanently altering
the breed. Nevertheless we may infer that this process, continued
during centuries, would improve and modify any breed, in the same way
as Bakewell, Collins, &c., by this very same process, only carried on
more methodically, did greatly modify, even during their lifetimes, the
forms and qualities of their cattle. Slow and insensible changes of
this kind could never be recognised unless actual measurements or
careful drawings of the breeds in question have been made long ago,
which may serve for comparison. In some cases, however, unchanged, or
but little changed, individuals of the same breed exist in less
civilised districts, where the breed has been less improved. There is
reason to believe that King Charles’ spaniel has been unconsciously
modified to a large extent since the time of that monarch. Some highly
competent authorities are convinced that the setter is directly derived
from the spaniel, and has probably been slowly altered from it. It is
known that the English pointer has been greatly changed within the last
century, and in this case the change has, it is believed, been chiefly
effected by crosses with the foxhound; but what concerns us is, that
the change has been effected unconsciously and gradually, and yet so
effectually that, though the old Spanish pointer certainly came from
Spain, Mr. Borrow has not seen, as I am informed by him, any native dog
in Spain like our pointer.

By a similar process of selection, and by careful training, English
race-horses have come to surpass in fleetness and size the parent
Arabs, so that the latter, by the regulations for the Goodwood Races,
are favoured in the weights which they carry. Lord Spencer and others
have shown how the cattle of England have increased in weight and in
early maturity, compared with the stock formerly kept in this country.
By comparing the accounts given in various old treatises of the former
and present state of carrier and tumbler pigeons in Britain, India, and
Persia, we can trace the stages through which they have insensibly
passed, and come to differ so greatly from the rock-pigeon.

Youatt gives an excellent illustration of the effects of a course of
selection which may be considered as unconscious, in so far that the
breeders could never have expected, or even wished, to produce the
result which ensued—namely, the production of the distinct strains. The
two flocks of Leicester sheep kept by Mr. Buckley and Mr. Burgess, as
Mr. Youatt remarks, “Have been purely bred from the original stock of
Mr. Bakewell for upwards of fifty years. There is not a suspicion
existing in the mind of any one at all acquainted with the subject that
the owner of either of them has deviated in any one instance from the
pure blood of Mr. Bakewell’s flock, and yet the difference between the
sheep possessed by these two gentlemen is so great that they have the
appearance of being quite different varieties.”

If there exist savages so barbarous as never to think of the inherited
character of the offspring of their domestic animals, yet any one
animal particularly useful to them, for any special purpose, would be
carefully preserved during famines and other accidents, to which
savages are so liable, and such choice animals would thus generally
leave more offspring than the inferior ones; so that in this case there
would be a kind of unconscious selection going on. We see the value set
on animals even by the barbarians of Tierra del Fuego, by their killing
and devouring their old women, in times of dearth, as of less value
than their dogs.

In plants the same gradual process of improvement through the
occasional preservation of the best individuals, whether or not
sufficiently distinct to be ranked at their first appearance as
distinct varieties, and whether or not two or more species or races
have become blended together by crossing, may plainly be recognised in
the increased size and beauty which we now see in the varieties of the
heartsease, rose, pelargonium, dahlia, and other plants, when compared
with the older varieties or with their parent-stocks. No one would ever
expect to get a first-rate heartsease or dahlia from the seed of a wild
plant. No one would expect to raise a first-rate melting pear from the
seed of a wild pear, though he might succeed from a poor seedling
growing wild, if it had come from a garden-stock. The pear, though
cultivated in classical times, appears, from Pliny’s description, to
have been a fruit of very inferior quality. I have seen great surprise
expressed in horticultural works at the wonderful skill of gardeners in
having produced such splendid results from such poor materials; but the
art has been simple, and, as far as the final result is concerned, has
been followed almost unconsciously. It has consisted in always
cultivating the best known variety, sowing its seeds, and, when a
slightly better variety chanced to appear, selecting it, and so
onwards. But the gardeners of the classical period, who cultivated the
best pears which they could procure, never thought what splendid fruit
we should eat; though we owe our excellent fruit in some small degree
to their having naturally chosen and preserved the best varieties they
could anywhere find.

A large amount of change, thus slowly and unconsciously accumulated,
explains, as I believe, the well-known fact, that in a number of cases
we cannot recognise, and therefore do not know, the wild parent-stocks
of the plants which have been longest cultivated in our flower and
kitchen gardens. If it has taken centuries or thousands of years to
improve or modify most of our plants up to their present standard of
usefulness to man, we can understand how it is that neither Australia,
the Cape of Good Hope, nor any other region inhabited by quite
uncivilised man, has afforded us a single plant worth culture. It is
not that these countries, so rich in species, do not by a strange
chance possess the aboriginal stocks of any useful plants, but that the
native plants have not been improved by continued selection up to a
standard of perfection comparable with that acquired by the plants in
countries anciently civilised.

In regard to the domestic animals kept by uncivilised man, it should
not be overlooked that they almost always have to struggle for their
own food, at least during certain seasons. And in two countries very
differently circumstanced, individuals of the same species, having
slightly different constitutions or structure, would often succeed
better in the one country than in the other, and thus by a process of
“natural selection,” as will hereafter be more fully explained, two
sub-breeds might be formed. This, perhaps, partly explains why the
varieties kept by savages, as has been remarked by some authors, have
more of the character of true species than the varieties kept in
civilised countries.

On the view here given of the important part which selection by man has
played, it becomes at once obvious, how it is that our domestic races
show adaptation in their structure or in their habits to man’s wants or
fancies. We can, I think, further understand the frequently abnormal
character of our domestic races, and likewise their differences being
so great in external characters, and relatively so slight in internal
parts or organs. Man can hardly select, or only with much difficulty,
any deviation of structure excepting such as is externally visible; and
indeed he rarely cares for what is internal. He can never act by
selection, excepting on variations which are first given to him in some
slight degree by nature. No man would ever try to make a fantail till
he saw a pigeon with a tail developed in some slight degree in an
unusual manner, or a pouter till he saw a pigeon with a crop of
somewhat unusual size; and the more abnormal or unusual any character
was when it first appeared, the more likely it would be to catch his
attention. But to use such an expression as trying to make a fantail
is, I have no doubt, in most cases, utterly incorrect. The man who
first selected a pigeon with a slightly larger tail, never dreamed what
the descendants of that pigeon would become through long-continued,
partly unconscious and partly methodical, selection. Perhaps the parent
bird of all fantails had only fourteen tail-feathers somewhat expanded,
like the present Java fantail, or like individuals of other and
distinct breeds, in which as many as seventeen tail-feathers have been
counted. Perhaps the first pouter-pigeon did not inflate its crop much
more than the turbit now does the upper part of its œsophagus—a habit
which is disregarded by all fanciers, as it is not one of the points of
the breed.

Nor let it be thought that some great deviation of structure would be
necessary to catch the fancier’s eye: he perceives extremely small
differences, and it is in human nature to value any novelty, however
slight, in one’s own possession. Nor must the value which would
formerly have been set on any slight differences in the individuals of
the same species, be judged of by the value which is now set on them,
after several breeds have fairly been established. It is known that
with pigeons many slight variations now occasionally appear, but these
are rejected as faults or deviations from the standard of perfection in
each breed. The common goose has not given rise to any marked
varieties; hence the Toulouse and the common breed, which differ only
in colour, that most fleeting of characters, have lately been exhibited
as distinct at our poultry-shows.

These views appear to explain what has sometimes been noticed, namely,
that we know hardly anything about the origin or history of any of our
domestic breeds. But, in fact, a breed, like a dialect of a language,
can hardly be said to have a distinct origin. A man preserves and
breeds from an individual with some slight deviation of structure, or
takes more care than usual in matching his best animals, and thus
improves them, and the improved animals slowly spread in the immediate
neighbourhood. But they will as yet hardly have a distinct name, and
from being only slightly valued, their history will have been
disregarded. When further improved by the same slow and gradual
process, they will spread more widely, and will be recognised as
something distinct and valuable, and will then probably first receive a
provincial name. In semi-civilised countries, with little free
communication, the spreading of a new sub-breed will be a slow process.
As soon as the points of value are once acknowledged, the principle, as
I have called it, of unconscious selection will always tend—perhaps
more at one period than at another, as the breed rises or falls in
fashion—perhaps more in one district than in another, according to the
state of civilisation of the inhabitants—slowly to add to the
characteristic features of the breed, whatever they may be. But the
chance will be infinitely small of any record having been preserved of
such slow, varying, and insensible changes.

_Circumstances favourable to Man’s Power of Selection._

I will now say a few words on the circumstances, favourable or the
reverse, to man’s power of selection. A high degree of variability is
obviously favourable, as freely giving the materials for selection to
work on; not that mere individual differences are not amply sufficient,
with extreme care, to allow of the accumulation of a large amount of
modification in almost any desired direction. But as variations
manifestly useful or pleasing to man appear only occasionally, the
chance of their appearance will be much increased by a large number of
individuals being kept. Hence number is of the highest importance for
success. On this principle Marshall formerly remarked, with respect to
the sheep of part of Yorkshire, “As they generally belong to poor
people, and are mostly _in small lots_, they never can be improved.” On
the other hand, nurserymen, from keeping large stocks of the same
plant, are generally far more successful than amateurs in raising new
and valuable varieties. A large number of individuals of an animal or
plant can be reared only where the conditions for its propagation are
favourable. When the individuals are scanty all will be allowed to
breed, whatever their quality may be, and this will effectually prevent
selection. But probably the most important element is that the animal
or plant should be so highly valued by man, that the closest attention
is paid to even the slightest deviations in its qualities or structure.
Unless such attention be paid nothing can be effected. I have seen it
gravely remarked, that it was most fortunate that the strawberry began
to vary just when gardeners began to attend to this plant. No doubt the
strawberry had always varied since it was cultivated, but the slight
varieties had been neglected. As soon, however, as gardeners picked out
individual plants with slightly larger, earlier, or better fruit, and
raised seedlings from them, and again picked out the best seedlings and
bred from them, then (with some aid by crossing distinct species) those
many admirable varieties of the strawberry were raised which have
appeared during the last half-century.

With animals, facility in preventing crosses is an important element in
the formation of new races—at least, in a country which is already
stocked with other races. In this respect enclosure of the land plays a
part. Wandering savages or the inhabitants of open plains rarely
possess more than one breed of the same species. Pigeons can be mated
for life, and this is a great convenience to the fancier, for thus many
races may be improved and kept true, though mingled in the same aviary;
and this circumstance must have largely favoured the formation of new
breeds. Pigeons, I may add, can be propagated in great numbers and at a
very quick rate, and inferior birds may be freely rejected, as when
killed they serve for food. On the other hand, cats, from their
nocturnal rambling habits, can not be easily matched, and, although so
much valued by women and children, we rarely see a distinct breed long
kept up; such breeds as we do sometimes see are almost always imported
from some other country. Although I do not doubt that some domestic
animals vary less than others, yet the rarity or absence of distinct
breeds of the cat, the donkey, peacock, goose, &c., may be attributed
in main part to selection not having been brought into play: in cats,
from the difficulty in pairing them; in donkeys, from only a few being
kept by poor people, and little attention paid to their breeding; for
recently in certain parts of Spain and of the United States this animal
has been surprisingly modified and improved by careful selection; in
peacocks, from not being very easily reared and a large stock not kept;
in geese, from being valuable only for two purposes, food and feathers,
and more especially from no pleasure having been felt in the display of
distinct breeds; but the goose, under the conditions to which it is
exposed when domesticated, seems to have a singularly inflexible
organisation, though it has varied to a slight extent, as I have
elsewhere described.

Some authors have maintained that the amount of variation in our
domestic productions is soon reached, and can never afterward be
exceeded. It would be somewhat rash to assert that the limit has been
attained in any one case; for almost all our animals and plants have
been greatly improved in many ways within a recent period; and this
implies variation. It would be equally rash to assert that characters
now increased to their utmost limit, could not, after remaining fixed
for many centuries, again vary under new conditions of life. No doubt,
as Mr. Wallace has remarked with much truth, a limit will be at last
reached. For instance, there must be a limit to the fleetness of any
terrestrial animal, as this will be determined by the friction to be
overcome, the weight of the body to be carried, and the power of
contraction in the muscular fibres. But what concerns us is that the
domestic varieties of the same species differ from each other in almost
every character, which man has attended to and selected, more than do
the distinct species of the same genera. Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire
has proved this in regard to size, and so it is with colour, and
probably with the length of hair. With respect to fleetness, which
depends on many bodily characters, Eclipse was far fleeter, and a
dray-horse is comparably stronger, than any two natural species
belonging to the same genus. So with plants, the seeds of the different
varieties of the bean or maize probably differ more in size than do the
seeds of the distinct species in any one genus in the same two
families. The same remark holds good in regard to the fruit of the
several varieties of the plum, and still more strongly with the melon,
as well as in many other analogous cases.

To sum up on the origin of our domestic races of animals and plants.
Changed conditions of life are of the highest importance in causing
variability, both by acting directly on the organisation, and
indirectly by affecting the reproductive system. It is not probable
that variability is an inherent and necessary contingent, under all
circumstances. The greater or less force of inheritance and reversion
determine whether variations shall endure. Variability is governed by
many unknown laws, of which correlated growth is probably the most
important. Something, but how much we do not know, may be attributed to
the definite action of the conditions of life. Some, perhaps a great,
effect may be attributed to the increased use or disuse of parts. The
final result is thus rendered infinitely complex. In some cases the
intercrossing of aboriginally distinct species appears to have played
an important part in the origin of our breeds. When several breeds have
once been formed in any country, their occasional intercrossing, with
the aid of selection, has, no doubt, largely aided in the formation of
new sub-breeds; but the importance of crossing has been much
exaggerated, both in regard to animals and to those plants which are
propagated by seed. With plants which are temporarily propagated by
cuttings, buds, &c., the importance of crossing is immense; for the
cultivator may here disregard the extreme variability both of hybrids
and of mongrels, and the sterility of hybrids; but plants not
propagated by seed are of little importance to us, for their endurance
is only temporary. Over all these causes of change, the accumulative
action of selection, whether applied methodically and quickly, or
unconsciously and slowly, but more efficiently, seems to have been the
predominant power.

CHAPTER II.
VARIATION UNDER NATURE.

Variability—Individual differences—Doubtful species—Wide ranging, much
diffused, and common species, vary most—Species of the larger genera in
each country vary more frequently than the species of the smaller
genera—Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in
being very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having
restricted ranges.

Before applying the principles arrived at in the last chapter to
organic beings in a state of nature, we must briefly discuss whether
these latter are subject to any variation. To treat this subject
properly, a long catalogue of dry facts ought to be given; but these I
shall reserve for a future work. Nor shall I here discuss the various
definitions which have been given of the term species. No one
definition has satisfied all naturalists; yet every naturalist knows
vaguely what he means when he speaks of a species. Generally the term
includes the unknown element of a distinct act of creation. The term
“variety” is almost equally difficult to define; but here community of
descent is almost universally implied, though it can rarely be proved.
We have also what are called monstrosities; but they graduate into
varieties. By a monstrosity I presume is meant some considerable
deviation of structure, generally injurious, or not useful to the
species. Some authors use the term “variation” in a technical sense, as
implying a modification directly due to the physical conditions of
life; and “variations” in this sense are supposed not to be inherited;
but who can say that the dwarfed condition of shells in the brackish
waters of the Baltic, or dwarfed plants on Alpine summits, or the
thicker fur of an animal from far northwards, would not in some cases
be inherited for at least a few generations? And in this case I presume
that the form would be called a variety.

It may be doubted whether sudden and considerable deviations of
structure, such as we occasionally see in our domestic productions,
more especially with plants, are ever permanently propagated in a state
of nature. Almost every part of every organic being is so beautifully
related to its complex conditions of life that it seems as improbable
that any part should have been suddenly produced perfect, as that a
complex machine should have been invented by man in a perfect state.
Under domestication monstrosities sometimes occur which resemble normal
structures in widely different animals. Thus pigs have occasionally
been born with a sort of proboscis, and if any wild species of the same
genus had naturally possessed a proboscis, it might have been argued
that this had appeared as a monstrosity; but I have as yet failed to
find, after diligent search, cases of monstrosities resembling normal
structures in nearly allied forms, and these alone bear on the
question. If monstrous forms of this kind ever do appear in a state of
nature and are capable of reproduction (which is not always the case),
as they occur rarely and singly, their preservation would depend on
unusually favourable circumstances. They would, also, during the first
and succeeding generations cross with the ordinary form, and thus their
abnormal character would almost inevitably be lost. But I shall have to
return in a future chapter to the preservation and perpetuation of
single or occasional variations.

_Individual Differences._

The many slight differences which appear in the offspring from the same
parents, or which it may be presumed have thus arisen, from being
observed in the individuals of the same species inhabiting the same
confined locality, may be called individual differences. No one
supposes that all the individuals of the same species are cast in the
same actual mould. These individual differences are of the highest
importance for us, for they are often inherited, as must be familiar to
every one; and they thus afford materials for natural selection to act
on and accumulate, in the same manner as man accumulates in any given
direction individual differences in his domesticated productions. These
individual differences generally affect what naturalists consider
unimportant parts; but I could show, by a long catalogue of facts, that
parts which must be called important, whether viewed under a
physiological or classificatory point of view, sometimes vary in the
individuals of the same species. I am convinced that the most
experienced naturalist would be surprised at the number of the cases of
variability, even in important parts of structure, which he could
collect on good authority, as I have collected, during a course of
years. It should be remembered that systematists are far from being
pleased at finding variability in important characters, and that there
are not many men who will laboriously examine internal and important
organs, and compare them in many specimens of the same species. It
would never have been expected that the branching of the main nerves
close to the great central ganglion of an insect would have been
variable in the same species; it might have been thought that changes
of this nature could have been effected only by slow degrees; yet Sir
J. Lubbock has shown a degree of variability in these main nerves in
Coccus, which may almost be compared to the irregular branching of the
stem of a tree. This philosophical naturalist, I may add, has also
shown that the muscles in the larvæ of certain insects are far from
uniform. Authors sometimes argue in a circle when they state that
important organs never vary; for these same authors practically rank
those parts as important (as some few naturalists have honestly
confessed) which do not vary; and, under this point of view, no
instance will ever be found of an important part varying; but under any
other point of view many instances assuredly can be given.

There is one point connected with individual differences which is
extremely perplexing: I refer to those genera which have been called
“protean” or “polymorphic,” in which species present an inordinate
amount of variation. With respect to many of these forms, hardly two
naturalists agree whether to rank them as species or as varieties. We
may instance Rubus, Rosa, and Hieracium among plants, several genera of
insects, and of Brachiopod shells. In most polymorphic genera some of
the species have fixed and definite characters. Genera which are
polymorphic in one country seem to be, with a few exceptions,
polymorphic in other countries, and likewise, judging from Brachiopod
shells, at former periods of time. These facts are very perplexing, for
they seem to show that this kind of variability is independent of the
conditions of life. I am inclined to suspect that we see, at least in
some of these polymorphic genera, variations which are of no service or
disservice to the species, and which consequently have not been seized
on and rendered definite by natural selection, as hereafter to be
explained.

Individuals of the same species often present, as is known to every
one, great differences of structure, independently of variation, as in
the two sexes of various animals, in the two or three castes of sterile
females or workers among insects, and in the immature and larval states
of many of the lower animals. There are, also, cases of dimorphism and
trimorphism, both with animals and plants. Thus, Mr. Wallace, who has
lately called attention to the subject, has shown that the females of
certain species of butterflies, in the Malayan Archipelago, regularly
appear under two or even three conspicuously distinct forms, not
connected by intermediate varieties. Fritz Müller has described
analogous but more extraordinary cases with the males of certain
Brazilian Crustaceans: thus, the male of a Tanais regularly occurs
under two distinct forms; one of these has strong and differently
shaped pincers, and the other has antennæ much more abundantly
furnished with smelling-hairs. Although in most of these cases, the two
or three forms, both with animals and plants, are not now connected by
intermediate gradations, it is possible that they were once thus
connected. Mr. Wallace, for instance, describes a certain butterfly
which presents in the same island a great range of varieties connected
by intermediate links, and the extreme links of the chain closely
resemble the two forms of an allied dimorphic species inhabiting
another part of the Malay Archipelago. Thus also with ants, the several
worker-castes are generally quite distinct; but in some cases, as we
shall hereafter see, the castes are connected together by finely
graduated varieties. So it is, as I have myself observed, with some
dimorphic plants. It certainly at first appears a highly remarkable
fact that the same female butterfly should have the power of producing
at the same time three distinct female forms and a male; and that an
hermaphrodite plant should produce from the same seed-capsule three
distinct hermaphrodite forms, bearing three different kinds of females
and three or even six different kinds of males. Nevertheless these
cases are only exaggerations of the common fact that the female
produces offspring of two sexes which sometimes differ from each other
in a wonderful manner.

_Doubtful Species._

The forms which possess in some considerable degree the character of
species, but which are so closely similar to other forms, or are so
closely linked to them by intermediate gradations, that naturalists do
not like to rank them as distinct species, are in several respects the
most important for us. We have every reason to believe that many of
these doubtful and closely allied forms have permanently retained their
characters for a long time; for as long, as far as we know, as have
good and true species. Practically, when a naturalist can unite by
means of intermediate links any two forms, he treats the one as a
variety of the other, ranking the most common, but sometimes the one
first described as the species, and the other as the variety. But cases
of great difficulty, which I will not here enumerate, sometimes arise
in deciding whether or not to rank one form as a variety of another,
even when they are closely connected by intermediate links; nor will
the commonly assumed hybrid nature of the intermediate forms always
remove the difficulty. In very many cases, however, one form is ranked
as a variety of another, not because the intermediate links have
actually been found, but because analogy leads the observer to suppose
either that they do now somewhere exist, or may formerly have existed;
and here a wide door for the entry of doubt and conjecture is opened.

Hence, in determining whether a form should be ranked as a species or a
variety, the opinion of naturalists having sound judgment and wide
experience seems the only guide to follow. We must, however, in many
cases, decide by a majority of naturalists, for few well-marked and
well-known varieties can be named which have not been ranked as species
by at least some competent judges.

That varieties of this doubtful nature are far from uncommon cannot be
disputed. Compare the several floras of Great Britain, of France, or of
the United States, drawn up by different botanists, and see what a
surprising number of forms have been ranked by one botanist as good
species, and by another as mere varieties. Mr. H.C. Watson, to whom I
lie under deep obligation for assistance of all kinds, has marked for
me 182 British plants, which are generally considered as varieties, but
which have all been ranked by botanists as species; and in making this
list he has omitted many trifling varieties, but which nevertheless
have been ranked by some botanists as species, and he has entirely
omitted several highly polymorphic genera. Under genera, including the
most polymorphic forms, Mr. Babington gives 251 species, whereas Mr.
Bentham gives only 112—a difference of 139 doubtful forms! Among
animals which unite for each birth, and which are highly locomotive,
doubtful forms, ranked by one zoologist as a species and by another as
a variety, can rarely be found within the same country, but are common
in separated areas. How many of the birds and insects in North America
and Europe, which differ very slightly from each other, have been
ranked by one eminent naturalist as undoubted species, and by another
as varieties, or, as they are often called, geographical races! Mr.
Wallace, in several valuable papers on the various animals, especially
on the Lepidoptera, inhabiting the islands of the great Malayan
Archipelago, shows that they may be classed under four heads, namely,
as variable forms, as local forms, as geographical races or
sub-species, and as true representative species. The first or variable
forms vary much within the limits of the same island. The local forms
are moderately constant and distinct in each separate island; but when
all from the several islands are compared together, the differences are
seen to be so slight and graduated that it is impossible to define or
describe them, though at the same time the extreme forms are
sufficiently distinct. The geographical races or sub-species are local
forms completely fixed and isolated; but as they do not differ from
each other by strongly marked and important characters, “There is no
possible test but individual opinion to determine which of them shall
be considered as species and which as varieties.” Lastly,
representative species fill the same place in the natural economy of
each island as do the local forms and sub-species; but as they are
distinguished from each other by a greater amount of difference than
that between the local forms and sub-species, they are almost
universally ranked by naturalists as true species. Nevertheless, no
certain criterion can possibly be given by which variable forms, local
forms, sub species and representative species can be recognised.

Many years ago, when comparing, and seeing others compare, the birds
from the closely neighbouring islands of the Galapagos Archipelago, one
with another, and with those from the American mainland, I was much
struck how entirely vague and arbitrary is the distinction between
species and varieties. On the islets of the little Madeira group there
are many insects which are characterized as varieties in Mr.
Wollaston’s admirable work, but which would certainly be ranked as
distinct species by many entomologists. Even Ireland has a few animals,
now generally regarded as varieties, but which have been ranked as
species by some zoologists. Several experienced ornithologists consider
our British red grouse as only a strongly marked race of a Norwegian
species, whereas the greater number rank it as an undoubted species
peculiar to Great Britain. A wide distance between the homes of two
doubtful forms leads many naturalists to rank them as distinct species;
but what distance, it has been well asked, will suffice if that between
America and Europe is ample, will that between Europe and the Azores,
or Madeira, or the Canaries, or between the several islets of these
small archipelagos, be sufficient?

Mr. B.D. Walsh, a distinguished entomologist of the United States, has
described what he calls Phytophagic varieties and Phytophagic species.
Most vegetable-feeding insects live on one kind of plant or on one
group of plants; some feed indiscriminately on many kinds, but do not
in consequence vary. In several cases, however, insects found living on
different plants, have been observed by Mr. Walsh to present in their
larval or mature state, or in both states, slight, though constant
differences in colour, size, or in the nature of their secretions. In
some instances the males alone, in other instances, both males and
females, have been observed thus to differ in a slight degree. When the
differences are rather more strongly marked, and when both sexes and
all ages are affected, the forms are ranked by all entomologists as
good species. But no observer can determine for another, even if he can
do so for himself, which of these Phytophagic forms ought to be called
species and which varieties. Mr. Walsh ranks the forms which it may be
supposed would freely intercross, as varieties; and those which appear
to have lost this power, as species. As the differences depend on the
insects having long fed on distinct plants, it cannot be expected that
intermediate links connecting the several forms should now be found.
The naturalist thus loses his best guide in determining whether to rank
doubtful forms as varieties or species. This likewise necessarily
occurs with closely allied organisms, which inhabit distinct continents
or islands. When, on the other hand, an animal or plant ranges over the
same continent, or inhabits many islands in the same archipelago, and
presents different forms in the different areas, there is always a good
chance that intermediate forms will be discovered which will link
together the extreme states; and these are then degraded to the rank of
varieties.

Some few naturalists maintain that animals never present varieties; but
then these same naturalists rank the slightest difference as of
specific value; and when the same identical form is met with in two
distant countries, or in two geological formations, they believe that
two distinct species are hidden under the same dress. The term species
thus comes to be a mere useless abstraction, implying and assuming a
separate act of creation. It is certain that many forms, considered by
highly competent judges to be varieties, resemble species so completely
in character that they have been thus ranked by other highly competent
judges. But to discuss whether they ought to be called species or
varieties, before any definition of these terms has been generally
accepted, is vainly to beat the air.

Many of the cases of strongly marked varieties or doubtful species well
deserve consideration; for several interesting lines of argument, from
geographical distribution, analogical variation, hybridism, &c., have
been brought to bear in the attempt to determine their rank; but space
does not here permit me to discuss them. Close investigation, in many
cases, will no doubt bring naturalists to agree how to rank doubtful
forms. Yet it must be confessed that it is in the best known countries
that we find the greatest number of them. I have been struck with the
fact that if any animal or plant in a state of nature be highly useful
to man, or from any cause closely attracts his attention, varieties of
it will almost universally be found recorded. These varieties,
moreover, will often be ranked by some authors as species. Look at the
common oak, how closely it has been studied; yet a German author makes
more than a dozen species out of forms, which are almost universally
considered by other botanists to be varieties; and in this country the
highest botanical authorities and practical men can be quoted to show
that the sessile and pedunculated oaks are either good and distinct
species or mere varieties.

I may here allude to a remarkable memoir lately published by A. de
Candolle, on the oaks of the whole world. No one ever had more ample
materials for the discrimination of the species, or could have worked
on them with more zeal and sagacity. He first gives in detail all the
many points of structure which vary in the several species, and
estimates numerically the relative frequency of the variations. He
specifies above a dozen characters which may be found varying even on
the same branch, sometimes according to age or development, sometimes
without any assignable reason. Such characters are not of course of
specific value, but they are, as Asa Gray has remarked in commenting on
this memoir, such as generally enter into specific definitions. De
Candolle then goes on to say that he gives the rank of species to the
forms that differ by characters never varying on the same tree, and
never found connected by intermediate states. After this discussion,
the result of so much labour, he emphatically remarks: “They are
mistaken, who repeat that the greater part of our species are clearly
limited, and that the doubtful species are in a feeble minority. This
seemed to be true, so long as a genus was imperfectly known, and its
species were founded upon a few specimens, that is to say, were
provisional. Just as we come to know them better, intermediate forms
flow in, and doubts as to specific limits augment.” He also adds that
it is the best known species which present the greatest number of
spontaneous varieties and sub-varieties. Thus Quercus robur has
twenty-eight varieties, all of which, excepting six, are clustered
round three sub-species, namely Q. pedunculata, sessiliflora and
pubescens. The forms which connect these three sub-species are
comparatively rare; and, as Asa Gray again remarks, if these connecting
forms which are now rare were to become totally extinct the three
sub-species would hold exactly the same relation to each other as do
the four or five provisionally admitted species which closely surround
the typical Quercus robur. Finally, De Candolle admits that out of the
300 species, which will be enumerated in his Prodromus as belonging to
the oak family, at least two-thirds are provisional species, that is,
are not known strictly to fulfil the definition above given of a true
species. It should be added that De Candolle no longer believes that
species are immutable creations, but concludes that the derivative
theory is the most natural one, “and the most accordant with the known
facts in palæontology, geographical botany and zoology, of anatomical
structure and classification.”

When a young naturalist commences the study of a group of organisms
quite unknown to him he is at first much perplexed in determining what
differences to consider as specific and what as varietal; for he knows
nothing of the amount and kind of variation to which the group is
subject; and this shows, at least, how very generally there is some
variation. But if he confine his attention to one class within one
country he will soon make up his mind how to rank most of the doubtful
forms. His general tendency will be to make many species, for he will
become impressed, just like the pigeon or poultry fancier before
alluded to, with the amount of difference in the forms which he is
continually studying; and he has little general knowledge of analogical
variation in other groups and in other countries by which to correct
his first impressions. As he extends the range of his observations he
will meet with more cases of difficulty; for he will encounter a
greater number of closely-allied forms. But if his observations be
widely extended he will in the end generally be able to make up his own
mind; but he will succeed in this at the expense of admitting much
variation, and the truth of this admission will often be disputed by
other naturalists. When he comes to study allied forms brought from
countries not now continuous, in which case he cannot hope to find
intermediate links, he will be compelled to trust almost entirely to
analogy, and his difficulties will rise to a climax.

Certainly no clear line of demarcation has as yet been drawn between
species and sub-species—that is, the forms which in the opinion of some
naturalists come very near to, but do not quite arrive at, the rank of
species; or, again, between sub-species and well-marked varieties, or
between lesser varieties and individual differences. These differences
blend into each other by an insensible series; and a series impresses
the mind with the idea of an actual passage.

Hence I look at individual differences, though of small interest to the
systematist, as of the highest importance for us, as being the first
step towards such slight varieties as are barely thought worth
recording in works on natural history. And I look at varieties which
are in any degree more distinct and permanent, as steps towards more
strongly marked and permanent varieties; and at the latter, as leading
to sub-species, and then to species. The passage from one stage of
difference to another may, in many cases, be the simple result of the
nature of the organism and of the different physical conditions to
which it has long been exposed; but with respect to the more important
and adaptive characters, the passage from one stage of difference to
another may be safely attributed to the cumulative action of natural
selection, hereafter to be explained, and to the effects of the
increased use or disuse of parts. A well-marked variety may therefore
be called an incipient species; but whether this belief is justifiable
must be judged by the weight of the various facts and considerations to
be given throughout this work.

It need not be supposed that all varieties or incipient species attain
the rank of species. They may become extinct, or they may endure as
varieties for very long periods, as has been shown to be the case by
Mr. Wollaston with the varieties of certain fossil land-shells in
Madeira, and with plants by Gaston de Saporta. If a variety were to
flourish so as to exceed in numbers the parent species, it would then
rank as the species, and the species as the variety; or it might come
to supplant and exterminate the parent species; or both might co-exist,
and both rank as independent species. But we shall hereafter return to
this subject.

From these remarks it will be seen that I look at the term species as
one arbitrarily given, for the sake of convenience, to a set of
individuals closely resembling each other, and that it does not
essentially differ from the term variety, which is given to less
distinct and more fluctuating forms. The term variety, again, in
comparison with mere individual differences, is also applied
arbitrarily, for convenience sake.

_Wide-ranging, much-diffused, and common Species vary most._

Guided by theoretical considerations, I thought that some interesting
results might be obtained in regard to the nature and relations of the
species which vary most, by tabulating all the varieties in several
well-worked floras. At first this seemed a simple task; but Mr. H.C.
Watson, to whom I am much indebted for valuable advice and assistance
on this subject, soon convinced me that there were many difficulties,
as did subsequently Dr. Hooker, even in stronger terms. I shall reserve
for a future work the discussion of these difficulties, and the tables
of the proportional numbers of the varying species. Dr. Hooker permits
me to add that after having carefully read my manuscript, and examined
the tables, he thinks that the following statements are fairly well
established. The whole subject, however, treated as it necessarily here
is with much brevity, is rather perplexing, and allusions cannot be
avoided to the “struggle for existence,” “divergence of character,” and
other questions, hereafter to be discussed.

Alphonse de Candolle and others have shown that plants which have very
wide ranges generally present varieties; and this might have been
expected, as they are exposed to diverse physical conditions, and as
they come into competition (which, as we shall hereafter see, is a far
more important circumstance) with different sets of organic beings. But
my tables further show that, in any limited country, the species which
are the most common, that is abound most in individuals, and the
species which are most widely diffused within their own country (and
this is a different consideration from wide range, and to a certain
extent from commonness), oftenest give rise to varieties sufficiently
well-marked to have been recorded in botanical works. Hence it is the
most flourishing, or, as they may be called, the dominant species—those
which range widely, are the most diffused in their own country, and are
the most numerous in individuals—which oftenest produce well-marked
varieties, or, as I consider them, incipient species. And this,
perhaps, might have been anticipated; for, as varieties, in order to
become in any degree permanent, necessarily have to struggle with the
other inhabitants of the country, the species which are already
dominant will be the most likely to yield offspring, which, though in
some slight degree modified, still inherit those advantages that
enabled their parents to become dominant over their compatriots. In
these remarks on predominence, it should be understood that reference
is made only to the forms which come into competition with each other,
and more especially to the members of the same genus or class having
nearly similar habits of life. With respect to the number of
individuals or commonness of species, the comparison of course relates
only to the members of the same group. One of the higher plants may be
said to be dominant if it be more numerous in individuals and more
widely diffused than the other plants of the same country, which live
under nearly the same conditions. A plant of this kind is not the less
dominant because some conferva inhabiting the water or some parasitic
fungus is infinitely more numerous in individuals, and more widely
diffused. But if the conferva or parasitic fungus exceeds its allies in
the above respects, it will then be dominant within its own class.

_Species of the Larger Genera in each Country vary more Frequently than
the Species of the Smaller Genera._

If the plants inhabiting a country as described in any Flora, be
divided into two equal masses, all those in the larger genera (_i.e._,
those including many species) being placed on one side, and all those
in the smaller genera on the other side, the former will be found to
include a somewhat larger number of the very common and much diffused
or dominant species. This might have been anticipated, for the mere
fact of many species of the same genus inhabiting any country, shows
that there is something in the organic or inorganic conditions of that
country favourable to the genus; and, consequently, we might have
expected to have found in the larger genera, or those including many
species, a larger proportional number of dominant species. But so many
causes tend to obscure this result, that I am surprised that my tables
show even a small majority on the side of the larger genera. I will
here allude to only two causes of obscurity. Fresh water and
salt-loving plants generally have very wide ranges and are much
diffused, but this seems to be connected with the nature of the
stations inhabited by them, and has little or no relation to the size
of the genera to which the species belong. Again, plants low in the
scale of organisation are generally much more widely diffused than
plants higher in the scale; and here again there is no close relation
to the size of the genera. The cause of lowly-organised plants ranging
widely will be discussed in our chapter on Geographical Distribution.

From looking at species as only strongly marked and well-defined
varieties, I was led to anticipate that the species of the larger
genera in each country would oftener present varieties, than the
species of the smaller genera; for wherever many closely related
species (_i.e._, species of the same genus) have been formed, many
varieties or incipient species ought, as a general rule, to be now
forming. Where many large trees grow, we expect to find saplings. Where
many species of a genus have been formed through variation,
circumstances have been favourable for variation; and hence we might
expect that the circumstances would generally still be favourable to
variation. On the other hand, if we look at each species as a special
act of creation, there is no apparent reason why more varieties should
occur in a group having many species, than in one having few.

To test the truth of this anticipation I have arranged the plants of
twelve countries, and the coleopterous insects of two districts, into
two nearly equal masses, the species of the larger genera on one side,
and those of the smaller genera on the other side, and it has
invariably proved to be the case that a larger proportion of the
species on the side of the larger genera presented varieties, than on
the side of the smaller genera. Moreover, the species of the large
genera which present any varieties, invariably present a larger average
number of varieties than do the species of the small genera. Both these
results follow when another division is made, and when all the least
genera, with from only one to four species, are altogether excluded
from the tables. These facts are of plain signification on the view
that species are only strongly marked and permanent varieties; for
wherever many species of the same genus have been formed, or where, if
we may use the expression, the manufactory of species has been active,
we ought generally to find the manufactory still in action, more
especially as we have every reason to believe the process of
manufacturing new species to be a slow one. And this certainly holds
true if varieties be looked at as incipient species; for my tables
clearly show, as a general rule, that, wherever many species of a genus
have been formed, the species of that genus present a number of
varieties, that is, of incipient species, beyond the average. It is not
that all large genera are now varying much, and are thus increasing in
the number of their species, or that no small genera are now varying
and increasing; for if this had been so, it would have been fatal to my
theory; inasmuch as geology plainly tells us that small genera have in
the lapse of time often increased greatly in size; and that large
genera have often come to their maxima, declined, and disappeared. All
that we want to show is, that where many species of a genus have been
formed, on an average many are still forming; and this certainly holds
good.

_Many of the Species included within the Larger Genera resemble
Varieties in being very closely, but unequally, related to each other,
and in having restricted ranges._

There are other relations between the species of large genera and their
recorded varieties which deserve notice. We have seen that there is no
infallible criterion by which to distinguish species and well-marked
varieties; and when intermediate links have not been found between
doubtful forms, naturalists are compelled to come to a determination by
the amount of difference between them, judging by analogy whether or
not the amount suffices to raise one or both to the rank of species.
Hence the amount of difference is one very important criterion in
settling whether two forms should be ranked as species or varieties.
Now Fries has remarked in regard to plants, and Westwood in regard to
insects, that in large genera the amount of difference between the
species is often exceedingly small. I have endeavoured to test this
numerically by averages, and, as far as my imperfect results go, they
confirm the view. I have also consulted some sagacious and experienced
observers, and, after deliberation, they concur in this view. In this
respect, therefore, the species of the larger genera resemble
varieties, more than do the species of the smaller genera. Or the case
may be put in another way, and it may be said, that in the larger
genera, in which a number of varieties or incipient species greater
than the average are now manufacturing, many of the species already
manufactured still to a certain extent resemble varieties, for they
differ from each other by a less than the usual amount of difference.

Moreover, the species of the larger genera are related to each other,
in the same manner as the varieties of any one species are related to
each other. No naturalist pretends that all the species of a genus are
equally distinct from each other; they may generally be divided into
sub-genera, or sections, or lesser groups. As Fries has well remarked,
little groups of species are generally clustered like satellites around
other species. And what are varieties but groups of forms, unequally
related to each other, and clustered round certain forms—that is, round
their parent-species. Undoubtedly there is one most important point of
difference between varieties and species, namely, that the amount of
difference between varieties, when compared with each other or with
their parent-species, is much less than that between the species of the
same genus. But when we come to discuss the principle, as I call it, of
divergence of character, we shall see how this may be explained, and
how the lesser differences between varieties tend to increase into the
greater differences between species.

There is one other point which is worth notice. Varieties generally
have much restricted ranges. This statement is indeed scarcely more
than a truism, for if a variety were found to have a wider range than
that of its supposed parent-species, their denominations would be
reversed. But there is reason to believe that the species which are
very closely allied to other species, and in so far resemble varieties,
often have much restricted ranges. For instance, Mr. H.C. Watson has
marked for me in the well-sifted London catalogue of Plants (4th
edition) sixty-three plants which are therein ranked as species, but
which he considers as so closely allied to other species as to be of
doubtful value: these sixty-three reputed species range on an average
over 6.9 of the provinces into which Mr. Watson has divided Great
Britain. Now, in this same catalogue, fifty-three acknowledged
varieties are recorded, and these range over 7.7 provinces; whereas,
the species to which these varieties belong range over 14.3 provinces.
So that the acknowledged varieties have very nearly the same restricted
average range, as have the closely allied forms, marked for me by Mr.
Watson as doubtful species, but which are almost universally ranked by
British botanists as good and true species.

_Summary._

Finally, varieties cannot be distinguished from species—except, first,
by the discovery of intermediate linking forms; and, secondly, by a
certain indefinite amount of difference between them; for two forms, if
differing very little, are generally ranked as varieties,
notwithstanding that they cannot be closely connected; but the amount
of difference considered necessary to give to any two forms the rank of
species cannot be defined. In genera having more than the average
number of species in any country, the species of these genera have more
than the average number of varieties. In large genera the species are
apt to be closely but unequally allied together, forming little
clusters round other species. Species very closely allied to other
species apparently have restricted ranges. In all these respects the
species of large genera present a strong analogy with varieties. And we
can clearly understand these analogies, if species once existed as
varieties, and thus originated; whereas, these analogies are utterly
inexplicable if species are independent creations.

We have also seen that it is the most flourishing or dominant species
of the larger genera within each class which on an average yield the
greatest number of varieties, and varieties, as we shall hereafter see,
tend to become converted into new and distinct species. Thus the larger
genera tend to become larger; and throughout nature the forms of life
which are now dominant tend to become still more dominant by leaving
many modified and dominant descendants. But, by steps hereafter to be
explained, the larger genera also tend to break up into smaller genera.
And thus, the forms of life throughout the universe become divided into
groups subordinate to groups.

CHAPTER III.
STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.

Its bearing on natural selection—The term used in a wide
sense—Geometrical ratio of increase—Rapid increase of naturalised
animals and plants—Nature of the checks to increase—Competition
universal—Effects of climate—Protection from the number of
individuals—Complex relations of all animals and plants throughout
nature—Struggle for life most severe between individuals and varieties
of the same species: often severe between species of the same genus—The
relation of organism to organism the most important of all relations.

Before entering on the subject of this chapter I must make a few
preliminary remarks to show how the struggle for existence bears on
natural selection. It has been seen in the last chapter that among
organic beings in a state of nature there is some individual
variability: indeed I am not aware that this has ever been disputed. It
is immaterial for us whether a multitude of doubtful forms be called
species or sub-species or varieties; what rank, for instance, the two
or three hundred doubtful forms of British plants are entitled to hold,
if the existence of any well-marked varieties be admitted. But the mere
existence of individual variability and of some few well-marked
varieties, though necessary as the foundation for the work, helps us
but little in understanding how species arise in nature. How have all
those exquisite adaptations of one part of the organisation to another
part, and to the conditions of life and of one organic being to another
being, been perfected? We see these beautiful co-adaptations most
plainly in the woodpecker and the mistletoe; and only a little less
plainly in the humblest parasite which clings to the hairs of a
quadruped or feathers of a bird; in the structure of the beetle which
dives through the water; in the plumed seed which is wafted by the
gentlest breeze; in short, we see beautiful adaptations everywhere and
in every part of the organic world.

Again, it may be asked, how is it that varieties, which I have called
incipient species, become ultimately converted into good and distinct
species, which in most cases obviously differ from each other far more
than do the varieties of the same species? How do those groups of
species, which constitute what are called distinct genera, and which
differ from each other more than do the species of the same genus,
arise? All these results, as we shall more fully see in the next
chapter, follow from the struggle for life. Owing to this struggle,
variations, however slight and from whatever cause proceeding, if they
be in any degree profitable to the individuals of a species, in their
infinitely complex relations to other organic beings and to their
physical conditions of life, will tend to the preservation of such
individuals, and will generally be inherited by the offspring. The
offspring, also, will thus have a better chance of surviving, for, of
the many individuals of any species which are periodically born, but a
small number can survive. I have called this principle, by which each
slight variation, if useful, is preserved, by the term natural
selection, in order to mark its relation to man’s power of selection.
But the expression often used by Mr. Herbert Spencer, of the Survival
of the Fittest, is more accurate, and is sometimes equally convenient.
We have seen that man by selection can certainly produce great results,
and can adapt organic beings to his own uses, through the accumulation
of slight but useful variations, given to him by the hand of Nature.
But Natural Selection, we shall hereafter see, is a power incessantly
ready for action, and is as immeasurably superior to man’s feeble
efforts, as the works of Nature are to those of Art.

We will now discuss in a little more detail the struggle for existence.
In my future work this subject will be treated, as it well deserves, at
greater length. The elder De Candolle and Lyell have largely and
philosophically shown that all organic beings are exposed to severe
competition. In regard to plants, no one has treated this subject with
more spirit and ability than W. Herbert, Dean of Manchester, evidently
the result of his great horticultural knowledge. Nothing is easier than
to admit in words the truth of the universal struggle for life, or more
difficult—at least I found it so—than constantly to bear this
conclusion in mind. Yet unless it be thoroughly engrained in the mind,
the whole economy of nature, with every fact on distribution, rarity,
abundance, extinction, and variation, will be dimly seen or quite
misunderstood. We behold the face of nature bright with gladness, we
often see superabundance of food; we do not see or we forget that the
birds which are idly singing round us mostly live on insects or seeds,
and are thus constantly destroying life; or we forget how largely these
songsters, or their eggs, or their nestlings, are destroyed by birds
and beasts of prey; we do not always bear in mind, that, though food
may be now superabundant, it is not so at all seasons of each recurring
year.

_The Term, Struggle for Existence, used in a large sense._

I should premise that I use this term in a large and metaphorical
sense, including dependence of one being on another, and including
(which is more important) not only the life of the individual, but
success in leaving progeny. Two canine animals, in a time of dearth,
may be truly said to struggle with each other which shall get food and
live. But a plant on the edge of a desert is said to struggle for life
against the drought, though more properly it should be said to be
dependent on the moisture. A plant which annually produces a thousand
seeds, of which only one of an average comes to maturity, may be more
truly said to struggle with the plants of the same and other kinds
which already clothe the ground. The mistletoe is dependent on the
apple and a few other trees, but can only in a far-fetched sense be
said to struggle with these trees, for, if too many of these parasites
grow on the same tree, it languishes and dies. But several seedling
mistletoes, growing close together on the same branch, may more truly
be said to struggle with each other. As the mistletoe is disseminated
by birds, its existence depends on them; and it may metaphorically be
said to struggle with other fruit-bearing plants, in tempting the birds
to devour and thus disseminate its seeds. In these several senses,
which pass into each other, I use for convenience sake the general term
of Struggle for Existence.

_Geometrical Ratio of Increase._

A struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high rate at which
all organic beings tend to increase. Every being, which during its
natural lifetime produces several eggs or seeds, must suffer
destruction during some period of its life, and during some season or
occasional year, otherwise, on the principle of geometrical increase,
its numbers would quickly become so inordinately great that no country
could support the product. Hence, as more individuals are produced than
can possibly survive, there must in every case be a struggle for
existence, either one individual with another of the same species, or
with the individuals of distinct species, or with the physical
conditions of life. It is the doctrine of Malthus applied with manifold
force to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms; for in this case
there can be no artificial increase of food, and no prudential
restraint from marriage. Although some species may be now increasing,
more or less rapidly, in numbers, all cannot do so, for the world would
not hold them.

There is no exception to the rule that every organic being naturally
increases at so high a rate, that, if not destroyed, the earth would
soon be covered by the progeny of a single pair. Even slow-breeding man
has doubled in twenty-five years, and at this rate, in less than a
thousand years, there would literally not be standing room for his
progeny. Linnæus has calculated that if an annual plant produced only
two seeds—and there is no plant so unproductive as this—and their
seedlings next year produced two, and so on, then in twenty years there
would be a million plants. The elephant is reckoned the slowest breeder
of all known animals, and I have taken some pains to estimate its
probable minimum rate of natural increase; it will be safest to assume
that it begins breeding when thirty years old, and goes on breeding
till ninety years old, bringing forth six young in the interval, and
surviving till one hundred years old; if this be so, after a period of
from 740 to 750 years there would be nearly nineteen million elephants
alive descended from the first pair.

But we have better evidence on this subject than mere theoretical
calculations, namely, the numerous recorded cases of the astonishingly
rapid increase of various animals in a state of nature, when
circumstances have been favourable to them during two or three
following seasons. Still more striking is the evidence from our
domestic animals of many kinds which have run wild in several parts of
the world; if the statements of the rate of increase of slow-breeding
cattle and horses in South America, and latterly in Australia, had not
been well authenticated, they would have been incredible. So it is with
plants; cases could be given of introduced plants which have become
common throughout whole islands in a period of less than ten years.
Several of the plants, such as the cardoon and a tall thistle, which
are now the commonest over the wide plains of La Plata, clothing square
leagues of surface almost to the exclusion of every other plant, have
been introduced from Europe; and there are plants which now range in
India, as I hear from Dr. Falconer, from Cape Comorin to the Himalaya,
which have been imported from America since its discovery. In such
cases, and endless others could be given, no one supposes that the
fertility of the animals or plants has been suddenly and temporarily
increased in any sensible degree. The obvious explanation is that the
conditions of life have been highly favourable, and that there has
consequently been less destruction of the old and young and that nearly
all the young have been enabled to breed. Their geometrical ratio of
increase, the result of which never fails to be surprising, simply
explains their extraordinarily rapid increase and wide diffusion in
their new homes.

In a state of nature almost every full-grown plant annually produces
seed, and among animals there are very few which do not annually pair.
Hence we may confidently assert that all plants and animals are tending
to increase at a geometrical ratio—that all would rapidly stock every
station in which they could any how exist, and that this geometrical
tendency to increase must be checked by destruction at some period of
life. Our familiarity with the larger domestic animals tends, I think,
to mislead us; we see no great destruction falling on them, and we do
not keep in mind that thousands are annually slaughtered for food, and
that in a state of nature an equal number would have somehow to be
disposed of.

The only difference between organisms which annually produce eggs or
seeds by the thousand, and those which produce extremely few, is, that
the slow breeders would require a few more years to people, under
favourable conditions, a whole district, let it be ever so large. The
condor lays a couple of eggs and the ostrich a score, and yet in the
same country the condor may be the more numerous of the two. The Fulmar
petrel lays but one egg, yet it is believed to be the most numerous
bird in the world. One fly deposits hundreds of eggs, and another, like
the hippobosca, a single one. But this difference does not determine
how many individuals of the two species can be supported in a district.
A large number of eggs is of some importance to those species which
depend on a fluctuating amount of food, for it allows them rapidly to
increase in number. But the real importance of a large number of eggs
or seeds is to make up for much destruction at some period of life; and
this period in the great majority of cases is an early one. If an
animal can in any way protect its own eggs or young, a small number may
be produced, and yet the average stock be fully kept up; but if many
eggs or young are destroyed, many must be produced or the species will
become extinct. It would suffice to keep up the full number of a tree,
which lived on an average for a thousand years, if a single seed were
produced once in a thousand years, supposing that this seed were never
destroyed and could be ensured to germinate in a fitting place; so
that, in all cases, the average number of any animal or plant depends
only indirectly on the number of its eggs or seeds.

In looking at Nature, it is most necessary to keep the foregoing
considerations always in mind—never to forget that every single organic
being may be said to be striving to the utmost to increase in numbers;
that each lives by a struggle at some period of its life; that heavy
destruction inevitably falls either on the young or old during each
generation or at recurrent intervals. Lighten any check, mitigate the
destruction ever so little, and the number of the species will almost
instantaneously increase to any amount.

_Nature of the Checks to Increase._

The causes which check the natural tendency of each species to increase
are most obscure. Look at the most vigorous species; by as much as it
swarms in numbers, by so much will it tend to increase still further.
We know not exactly what the checks are even in a single instance. Nor
will this surprise any one who reflects how ignorant we are on this
head, even in regard to mankind, although so incomparably better known
than any other animal. This subject of the checks to increase has been
ably treated by several authors, and I hope in a future work to discuss
it at considerable length, more especially in regard to the feral
animals of South America. Here I will make only a few remarks, just to
recall to the reader’s mind some of the chief points. Eggs or very
young animals seem generally to suffer most, but this is not invariably
the case. With plants there is a vast destruction of seeds, but from
some observations which I have made it appears that the seedlings
suffer most from germinating in ground already thickly stocked with
other plants. Seedlings, also, are destroyed in vast numbers by various
enemies; for instance, on a piece of ground three feet long and two
wide, dug and cleared, and where there could be no choking from other
plants, I marked all the seedlings of our native weeds as they came up,
and out of 357 no less than 295 were destroyed, chiefly by slugs and
insects. If turf which has long been mown, and the case would be the
same with turf closely browsed by quadrupeds, be let to grow, the more
vigorous plants gradually kill the less vigorous, though fully grown
plants; thus out of twenty species grown on a little plot of mown turf
(three feet by four) nine species perished, from the other species
being allowed to grow up freely.

The amount of food for each species, of course, gives the extreme limit
to which each can increase; but very frequently it is not the obtaining
food, but the serving as prey to other animals, which determines the
average number of a species. Thus, there seems to be little doubt that
the stock of partridges, grouse, and hares on any large estate depends
chiefly on the destruction of vermin. If not one head of game were shot
during the next twenty years in England, and, at the same time, if no
vermin were destroyed, there would, in all probability, be less game
than at present, although hundreds of thousands of game animals are now
annually shot. On the other hand, in some cases, as with the elephant,
none are destroyed by beasts of prey; for even the tiger in India most
rarely dares to attack a young elephant protected by its dam.

Climate plays an important part in determining the average numbers of a
species, and periodical seasons of extreme cold or drought seem to be
the most effective of all checks. I estimated (chiefly from the greatly
reduced numbers of nests in the spring) that the winter of 1854-5
destroyed four-fifths of the birds in my own grounds; and this is a
tremendous destruction, when we remember that ten per cent. is an
extraordinarily severe mortality from epidemics with man. The action of
climate seems at first sight to be quite independent of the struggle
for existence; but in so far as climate chiefly acts in reducing food,
it brings on the most severe struggle between the individuals, whether
of the same or of distinct species, which subsist on the same kind of
food. Even when climate, for instance, extreme cold, acts directly, it
will be the least vigorous individuals, or those which have got least
food through the advancing winter, which will suffer the most. When we
travel from south to north, or from a damp region to a dry, we
invariably see some species gradually getting rarer and rarer, and
finally disappearing; and the change of climate being conspicuous, we
are tempted to attribute the whole effect to its direct action. But
this is a false view; we forget that each species, even where it most
abounds, is constantly suffering enormous destruction at some period of
its life, from enemies or from competitors for the same place and food;
and if these enemies or competitors be in the least degree favoured by
any slight change of climate, they will increase in numbers; and as
each area is already fully stocked with inhabitants, the other species
must decrease. When we travel southward and see a species decreasing in
numbers, we may feel sure that the cause lies quite as much in other
species being favoured, as in this one being hurt. So it is when we
travel northward, but in a somewhat lesser degree, for the number of
species of all kinds, and therefore of competitors, decreases
northward; hence in going northward, or in ascending a mountain, we far
oftener meet with stunted forms, due to the _directly_ injurious action
of climate, than we do in proceeding southward or in descending a
mountain. When we reach the Arctic regions, or snow-capped summits, or
absolute deserts, the struggle for life is almost exclusively with the
elements.

That climate acts in main part indirectly by favouring other species we
clearly see in the prodigious number of plants which in our gardens can
perfectly well endure our climate, but which never become naturalised,
for they cannot compete with our native plants nor resist destruction
by our native animals.

When a species, owing to highly favourable circumstances, increases
inordinately in numbers in a small tract, epidemics—at least, this
seems generally to occur with our game animals—often ensue; and here we
have a limiting check independent of the struggle for life. But even
some of these so-called epidemics appear to be due to parasitic worms,
which have from some cause, possibly in part through facility of
diffusion among the crowded animals, been disproportionally favoured:
and here comes in a sort of struggle between the parasite and its prey.

On the other hand, in many cases, a large stock of individuals of the
same species, relatively to the numbers of its enemies, is absolutely
necessary for its preservation. Thus we can easily raise plenty of corn
and rape-seed, &c., in our fields, because the seeds are in great
excess compared with the number of birds which feed on them; nor can
the birds, though having a superabundance of food at this one season,
increase in number proportionally to the supply of seed, as their
numbers are checked during the winter; but any one who has tried knows
how troublesome it is to get seed from a few wheat or other such plants
in a garden; I have in this case lost every single seed. This view of
the necessity of a large stock of the same species for its
preservation, explains, I believe, some singular facts in nature such
as that of very rare plants being sometimes extremely abundant, in the
few spots where they do exist; and that of some social plants being
social, that is abounding in individuals, even on the extreme verge of
their range. For in such cases, we may believe, that a plant could
exist only where the conditions of its life were so favourable that
many could exist together, and thus save the species from utter
destruction. I should add that the good effects of intercrossing, and
the ill effects of close interbreeding, no doubt come into play in many
of these cases; but I will not here enlarge on this subject.

_Complex Relations of all Animals and Plants to each other in the
Struggle for Existence._

Many cases are on record showing how complex and unexpected are the
checks and relations between organic beings, which have to struggle
together in the same country. I will give only a single instance,
which, though a simple one, interested me. In Staffordshire, on the
estate of a relation, where I had ample means of investigation, there
was a large and extremely barren heath, which had never been touched by
the hand of man; but several hundred acres of exactly the same nature
had been enclosed twenty-five years previously and planted with Scotch
fir. The change in the native vegetation of the planted part of the
heath was most remarkable, more than is generally seen in passing from
one quite different soil to another: not only the proportional numbers
of the heath-plants were wholly changed, but twelve species of plants
(not counting grasses and carices) flourished in the plantations, which
could not be found on the heath. The effect on the insects must have
been still greater, for six insectivorous birds were very common in the
plantations, which were not to be seen on the heath; and the heath was
frequented by two or three distinct insectivorous birds. Here we see
how potent has been the effect of the introduction of a single tree,
nothing whatever else having been done, with the exception of the land
having been enclosed, so that cattle could not enter. But how important
an element enclosure is, I plainly saw near Farnham, in Surrey. Here
there are extensive heaths, with a few clumps of old Scotch firs on the
distant hill-tops: within the last ten years large spaces have been
enclosed, and self-sown firs are now springing up in multitudes, so
close together that all cannot live. When I ascertained that these
young trees had not been sown or planted I was so much surprised at
their numbers that I went to several points of view, whence I could
examine hundreds of acres of the unenclosed heath, and literally I
could not see a single Scotch fir, except the old planted clumps. But
on looking closely between the stems of the heath, I found a multitude
of seedlings and little trees, which had been perpetually browsed down
by the cattle. In one square yard, at a point some hundred yards
distant from one of the old clumps, I counted thirty-two little trees;
and one of them, with twenty-six rings of growth, had, during many
years tried to raise its head above the stems of the heath, and had
failed. No wonder that, as soon as the land was enclosed, it became
thickly clothed with vigorously growing young firs. Yet the heath was
so extremely barren and so extensive that no one would ever have
imagined that cattle would have so closely and effectually searched it
for food.

Here we see that cattle absolutely determine the existence of the
Scotch fir; but in several parts of the world insects determine the
existence of cattle. Perhaps Paraguay offers the most curious instance
of this; for here neither cattle nor horses nor dogs have ever run
wild, though they swarm southward and northward in a feral state; and
Azara and Rengger have shown that this is caused by the greater number
in Paraguay of a certain fly, which lays its eggs in the navels of
these animals when first born. The increase of these flies, numerous as
they are, must be habitually checked by some means, probably by other
parasitic insects. Hence, if certain insectivorous birds were to
decrease in Paraguay, the parasitic insects would probably increase;
and this would lessen the number of the navel-frequenting flies—then
cattle and horses would become feral, and this would certainly greatly
alter (as indeed I have observed in parts of South America) the
vegetation: this again would largely affect the insects; and this, as
we have just seen in Staffordshire, the insectivorous birds, and so
onwards in ever-increasing circles of complexity. Not that under nature
the relations will ever be as simple as this. Battle within battle must
be continually recurring with varying success; and yet in the long-run
the forces are so nicely balanced that the face of nature remains for
long periods of time uniform, though assuredly the merest trifle would
give the victory to one organic being over another. Nevertheless, so
profound is our ignorance, and so high our presumption, that we marvel
when we hear of the extinction of an organic being; and as we do not
see the cause, we invoke cataclysms to desolate the world, or invent
laws on the duration of the forms of life!

 I am tempted to give one more instance showing how plants and animals,
 remote in the scale of nature, are bound together by a web of complex
 relations. I shall hereafter have occasion to show that the exotic
 Lobelia fulgens is never visited in my garden by insects, and
 consequently, from its peculiar structure, never sets a seed. Nearly
 all our orchidaceous plants absolutely require the visits of insects
 to remove their pollen-masses and thus to fertilise them. I find from
 experiments that humble-bees are almost indispensable to the
 fertilisation of the heartsease (Viola tricolor), for other bees do
 not visit this flower. I have also found that the visits of bees are
 necessary for the fertilisation of some kinds of clover; for instance
 twenty heads of Dutch clover (Trifolium repens) yielded 2,290 seeds,
 but twenty other heads, protected from bees, produced not one. Again,
 100 heads of red clover (T. pratense) produced 2,700 seeds, but the
 same number of protected heads produced not a single seed. Humble bees
 alone visit red clover, as other bees cannot reach the nectar. It has
 been suggested that moths may fertilise the clovers; but I doubt
 whether they could do so in the case of the red clover, from their
 weight not being sufficient to depress the wing petals. Hence we may
 infer as highly probable that, if the whole genus of humble-bees
 became extinct or very rare in England, the heartsease and red clover
 would become very rare, or wholly disappear. The number of humble-bees
 in any district depends in a great measure upon the number of
 field-mice, which destroy their combs and nests; and Colonel Newman,
 who has long attended to the habits of humble-bees, believes that
 “more than two-thirds of them are thus destroyed all over England.”
 Now the number of mice is largely dependent, as every one knows, on
 the number of cats; and Colonel Newman says, “Near villages and small
 towns I have found the nests of humble-bees more numerous than
 elsewhere, which I attribute to the number of cats that destroy the
 mice.” Hence it is quite credible that the presence of a feline animal
 in large numbers in a district might determine, through the
 intervention first of mice and then of bees, the frequency of certain
 flowers in that district!

In the case of every species, many different checks, acting at
different periods of life, and during different seasons or years,
probably come into play; some one check or some few being generally the
most potent, but all will concur in determining the average number, or
even the existence of the species. In some cases it can be shown that
widely-different checks act on the same species in different districts.
When we look at the plants and bushes clothing an entangled bank, we
are tempted to attribute their proportional numbers and kinds to what
we call chance. But how false a view is this! Every one has heard that
when an American forest is cut down, a very different vegetation
springs up; but it has been observed that ancient Indian ruins in the
Southern United States, which must formerly have been cleared of trees,
now display the same beautiful diversity and proportion of kinds as in
the surrounding virgin forests. What a struggle must have gone on
during long centuries between the several kinds of trees, each annually
scattering its seeds by the thousand; what war between insect and
insect—between insects, snails, and other animals with birds and beasts
of prey—all striving to increase, all feeding on each other, or on the
trees, their seeds and seedlings, or on the other plants which first
clothed the ground and thus checked the growth of the trees. Throw up a
handful of feathers, and all fall to the ground according to definite
laws; but how simple is the problem where each shall fall compared to
that of the action and reaction of the innumerable plants and animals
which have determined, in the course of centuries, the proportional
numbers and kinds of trees now growing on the old Indian ruins!

The dependency of one organic being on another, as of a parasite on its
prey, lies generally between beings remote in the scale of nature. This
is likewise sometimes the case with those which may strictly be said to
struggle with each other for existence, as in the case of locusts and
grass-feeding quadrupeds. But the struggle will almost invariably be
most severe between the individuals of the same species, for they
frequent the same districts, require the same food, and are exposed to
the same dangers. In the case of varieties of the same species, the
struggle will generally be almost equally severe, and we sometimes see
the contest soon decided: for instance, if several varieties of wheat
be sown together, and the mixed seed be resown, some of the varieties
which best suit the soil or climate, or are naturally the most fertile,
will beat the others and so yield more seed, and will consequently in a
few years supplant the other varieties. To keep up a mixed stock of
even such extremely close varieties as the variously coloured
sweet-peas, they must be each year harvested separately, and the seed
then mixed in due proportion, otherwise the weaker kinds will steadily
decrease in number and disappear. So again with the varieties of sheep:
it has been asserted that certain mountain-varieties will starve out
other mountain-varieties, so that they cannot be kept together. The
same result has followed from keeping together different varieties of
the medicinal leech. It may even be doubted whether the varieties of
any of our domestic plants or animals have so exactly the same
strength, habits, and constitution, that the original proportions of a
mixed stock (crossing being prevented) could be kept up for
half-a-dozen generations, if they were allowed to struggle together, in
the same manner as beings in a state of nature, and if the seed or
young were not annually preserved in due proportion.

_Struggle for Life most severe between Individuals and Varieties of the
same Species._

As the species of the same genus usually have, though by no means
invariably, much similarity in habits and constitution, and always in
structure, the struggle will generally be more severe between them, if
they come into competition with each other, than between the species of
distinct genera. We see this in the recent extension over parts of the
United States of one species of swallow having caused the decrease of
another species. The recent increase of the missel-thrush in parts of
Scotland has caused the decrease of the song-thrush. How frequently we
hear of one species of rat taking the place of another species under
the most different climates! In Russia the small Asiatic cockroach has
everywhere driven before it its great congener. In Australia the
imported hive-bee is rapidly exterminating the small, stingless native
bee. One species of charlock has been known to supplant another
species; and so in other cases. We can dimly see why the competition
should be most severe between allied forms, which fill nearly the same
place in the economy of nature; but probably in no one case could we
precisely say why one species has been victorious over another in the
great battle of life.

A corollary of the highest importance may be deduced from the foregoing
remarks, namely, that the structure of every organic being is related,
in the most essential yet often hidden manner, to that of all other
organic beings, with which it comes into competition for food or
residence, or from which it has to escape, or on which it preys. This
is obvious in the structure of the teeth and talons of the tiger; and
in that of the legs and claws of the parasite which clings to the hair
on the tiger’s body. But in the beautifully plumed seed of the
dandelion, and in the flattened and fringed legs of the water-beetle,
the relation seems at first confined to the elements of air and water.
Yet the advantage of the plumed seeds no doubt stands in the closest
relation to the land being already thickly clothed with other plants;
so that the seeds may be widely distributed and fall on unoccupied
ground. In the water-beetle, the structure of its legs, so well adapted
for diving, allows it to compete with other aquatic insects, to hunt
for its own prey, and to escape serving as prey to other animals.

The store of nutriment laid up within the seeds of many plants seems at
first sight to have no sort of relation to other plants. But from the
strong growth of young plants produced from such seeds, as peas and
beans, when sown in the midst of long grass, it may be suspected that
the chief use of the nutriment in the seed is to favour the growth of
the seedlings, whilst struggling with other plants growing vigorously
all around.

Look at a plant in the midst of its range! Why does it not double or
quadruple its numbers? We know that it can perfectly well withstand a
little more heat or cold, dampness or dryness, for elsewhere it ranges
into slightly hotter or colder, damper or drier districts. In this case
we can clearly see that if we wish in imagination to give the plant the
power of increasing in numbers, we should have to give it some
advantage over its competitors, or over the animals which prey on it.
On the confines of its geographical range, a change of constitution
with respect to climate would clearly be an advantage to our plant; but
we have reason to believe that only a few plants or animals range so
far, that they are destroyed exclusively by the rigour of the climate.
Not until we reach the extreme confines of life, in the Arctic regions
or on the borders of an utter desert, will competition cease. The land
may be extremely cold or dry, yet there will be competition between
some few species, or between the individuals of the same species, for
the warmest or dampest spots.

Hence we can see that when a plant or animal is placed in a new
country, among new competitors, the conditions of its life will
generally be changed in an essential manner, although the climate may
be exactly the same as in its former home. If its average numbers are
to increase in its new home, we should have to modify it in a different
way to what we should have had to do in its native country; for we
should have to give it some advantage over a different set of
competitors or enemies.

It is good thus to try in imagination to give any one species an
advantage over another. Probably in no single instance should we know
what to do. This ought to convince us of our ignorance on the mutual
relations of all organic beings; a conviction as necessary, as it is
difficult to acquire. All that we can do is to keep steadily in mind
that each organic being is striving to increase in a geometrical ratio;
that each, at some period of its life, during some season of the year,
during each generation, or at intervals, has to struggle for life and
to suffer great destruction. When we reflect on this struggle we may
console ourselves with the full belief that the war of nature is not
incessant, that no fear is felt, that death is generally prompt, and
that the vigorous, the healthy, and the happy survive and multiply.

CHAPTER IV.
NATURAL SELECTION; OR THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST.

Natural Selection—its power compared with man’s selection—its power on
characters of trifling importance—its power at all ages and on both
sexes—Sexual Selection—On the generality of intercrosses between
individuals of the same species—Circumstances favourable and
unfavourable to the results of Natural Selection, namely,
intercrossing, isolation, number of individuals—Slow action—Extinction
caused by Natural Selection—Divergence of Character, related to the
diversity of inhabitants of any small area and to naturalisation—Action
of Natural Selection, through Divergence of Character and Extinction,
on the descendants from a common parent—Explains the Grouping of all
organic beings—Advance in organisation—Low forms preserved—Convergence
of character—Indefinite multiplication of species—Summary.

How will the struggle for existence, briefly discussed in the last
chapter, act in regard to variation? Can the principle of selection,
which we have seen is so potent in the hands of man, apply under
nature? I think we shall see that it can act most efficiently. Let the
endless number of slight variations and individual differences
occurring in our domestic productions, and, in a lesser degree, in
those under nature, be borne in mind; as well as the strength of the
hereditary tendency. Under domestication, it may truly be said that the
whole organisation becomes in some degree plastic. But the variability,
which we almost universally meet with in our domestic productions is
not directly produced, as Hooker and Asa Gray have well remarked, by
man; he can neither originate varieties nor prevent their occurrence;
he can only preserve and accumulate such as do occur. Unintentionally
he exposes organic beings to new and changing conditions of life, and
variability ensues; but similar changes of conditions might and do
occur under nature. Let it also be borne in mind how infinitely complex
and close-fitting are the mutual relations of all organic beings to
each other and to their physical conditions of life; and consequently
what infinitely varied diversities of structure might be of use to each
being under changing conditions of life. Can it then be thought
improbable, seeing that variations useful to man have undoubtedly
occurred, that other variations useful in some way to each being in the
great and complex battle of life, should occur in the course of many
successive generations? If such do occur, can we doubt (remembering
that many more individuals are born than can possibly survive) that
individuals having any advantage, however slight, over others, would
have the best chance of surviving and procreating their kind? On the
other hand, we may feel sure that any variation in the least degree
injurious would be rigidly destroyed. This preservation of favourable
individual differences and variations, and the destruction of those
which are injurious, I have called Natural Selection, or the Survival
of the Fittest. Variations neither useful nor injurious would not be
affected by natural selection, and would be left either a fluctuating
element, as perhaps we see in certain polymorphic species, or would
ultimately become fixed, owing to the nature of the organism and the
nature of the conditions.

Several writers have misapprehended or objected to the term Natural
Selection. Some have even imagined that natural selection induces
variability, whereas it implies only the preservation of such
variations as arise and are beneficial to the being under its
conditions of life. No one objects to agriculturists speaking of the
potent effects of man’s selection; and in this case the individual
differences given by nature, which man for some object selects, must of
necessity first occur. Others have objected that the term selection
implies conscious choice in the animals which become modified; and it
has even been urged that, as plants have no volition, natural selection
is not applicable to them! In the literal sense of the word, no doubt,
natural selection is a false term; but who ever objected to chemists
speaking of the elective affinities of the various elements?—and yet an
acid cannot strictly be said to elect the base with which it in
preference combines. It has been said that I speak of natural selection
as an active power or Deity; but who objects to an author speaking of
the attraction of gravity as ruling the movements of the planets? Every
one knows what is meant and is implied by such metaphorical
expressions; and they are almost necessary for brevity. So again it is
difficult to avoid personifying the word Nature; but I mean by nature,
only the aggregate action and product of many natural laws, and by laws
the sequence of events as ascertained by us. With a little familiarity
such superficial objections will be forgotten.

We shall best understand the probable course of natural selection by
taking the case of a country undergoing some slight physical change,
for instance, of climate. The proportional numbers of its inhabitants
will almost immediately undergo a change, and some species will
probably become extinct. We may conclude, from what we have seen of the
intimate and complex manner in which the inhabitants of each country
are bound together, that any change in the numerical proportions of the
inhabitants, independently of the change of climate itself, would
seriously affect the others. If the country were open on its borders,
new forms would certainly immigrate, and this would likewise seriously
disturb the relations of some of the former inhabitants. Let it be
remembered how powerful the influence of a single introduced tree or
mammal has been shown to be. But in the case of an island, or of a
country partly surrounded by barriers, into which new and better
adapted forms could not freely enter, we should then have places in the
economy of nature which would assuredly be better filled up if some of
the original inhabitants were in some manner modified; for, had the
area been open to immigration, these same places would have been seized
on by intruders. In such cases, slight modifications, which in any way
favoured the individuals of any species, by better adapting them to
their altered conditions, would tend to be preserved; and natural
selection would have free scope for the work of improvement.

We have good reason to believe, as shown in the first chapter, that
changes in the conditions of life give a tendency to increased
variability; and in the foregoing cases the conditions the changed, and
this would manifestly be favourable to natural selection, by affording
a better chance of the occurrence of profitable variations. Unless such
occur, natural selection can do nothing. Under the term of
“variations,” it must never be forgotten that mere individual
differences are included. As man can produce a great result with his
domestic animals and plants by adding up in any given direction
individual differences, so could natural selection, but far more easily
from having incomparably longer time for action. Nor do I believe that
any great physical change, as of climate, or any unusual degree of
isolation, to check immigration, is necessary in order that new and
unoccupied places should be left for natural selection to fill up by
improving some of the varying inhabitants. For as all the inhabitants
of each country are struggling together with nicely balanced forces,
extremely slight modifications in the structure or habits of one
species would often give it an advantage over others; and still further
modifications of the same kind would often still further increase the
advantage, as long as the species continued under the same conditions
of life and profited by similar means of subsistence and defence. No
country can be named in which all the native inhabitants are now so
perfectly adapted to each other and to the physical conditions under
which they live, that none of them could be still better adapted or
improved; for in all countries, the natives have been so far conquered
by naturalised productions that they have allowed some foreigners to
take firm possession of the land. And as foreigners have thus in every
country beaten some of the natives, we may safely conclude that the
natives might have been modified with advantage, so as to have better
resisted the intruders.

As man can produce, and certainly has produced, a great result by his
methodical and unconscious means of selection, what may not natural
selection effect? Man can act only on external and visible characters:
Nature, if I may be allowed to personify the natural preservation or
survival of the fittest, cares nothing for appearances, except in so
far as they are useful to any being. She can act on every internal
organ, on every shade of constitutional difference, on the whole
machinery of life. Man selects only for his own good; Nature only for
that of the being which she tends. Every selected character is fully
exercised by her, as is implied by the fact of their selection. Man
keeps the natives of many climates in the same country. He seldom
exercises each selected character in some peculiar and fitting manner;
he feeds a long and a short-beaked pigeon on the same food; he does not
exercise a long-backed or long-legged quadruped in any peculiar manner;
he exposes sheep with long and short wool to the same climate; does not
allow the most vigorous males to struggle for the females; he does not
rigidly destroy all inferior animals, but protects during each varying
season, as far as lies in his power, all his productions. He often
begins his selection by some half-monstrous form, or at least by some
modification prominent enough to catch the eye or to be plainly useful
to him. Under nature, the slightest differences of structure or
constitution may well turn the nicely-balanced scale in the struggle
for life, and so be preserved. How fleeting are the wishes and efforts
of man! How short his time, and consequently how poor will be his
results, compared with those accumulated by Nature during whole
geological periods! Can we wonder, then, that Nature’s productions
should be far “truer” in character than man’s productions; that they
should be infinitely better adapted to the most complex conditions of
life, and should plainly bear the stamp of far higher workmanship?

It may metaphorically be said that natural selection is daily and
hourly scrutinising, throughout the world, the slightest variations;
rejecting those that are bad, preserving and adding up all that are
good; silently and insensibly working, _whenever and wherever
opportunity offers_, at the improvement of each organic being in
relation to its organic and inorganic conditions of life. We see
nothing of these slow changes in progress, until the hand of time has
marked the long lapse of ages, and then so imperfect is our view into
long-past geological ages that we see only that the forms of life are
now different from what they formerly were.

In order that any great amount of modification should be effected in a
species, a variety, when once formed must again, perhaps after a long
interval of time, vary or present individual differences of the same
favourable nature as before; and these must again be preserved, and so
onward, step by step. Seeing that individual differences of the same
kind perpetually recur, this can hardly be considered as an
unwarrantable assumption. But whether it is true, we can judge only by
seeing how far the hypothesis accords with and explains the general
phenomena of nature. On the other hand, the ordinary belief that the
amount of possible variation is a strictly limited quantity, is
likewise a simple assumption.

Although natural selection can act only through and for the good of
each being, yet characters and structures, which we are apt to consider
as of very trifling importance, may thus be acted on. When we see
leaf-eating insects green, and bark-feeders mottled-grey; the alpine
ptarmigan white in winter, the red-grouse the colour of heather, we
must believe that these tints are of service to these birds and insects
in preserving them from danger. Grouse, if not destroyed at some period
of their lives, would increase in countless numbers; they are known to
suffer largely from birds of prey; and hawks are guided by eyesight to
their prey,—so much so that on parts of the continent persons are
warned not to keep white pigeons, as being the most liable to
destruction. Hence natural selection might be effective in giving the
proper colour to each kind of grouse, and in keeping that colour, when
once acquired, true and constant. Nor ought we to think that the
occasional destruction of an animal of any particular colour would
produce little effect; we should remember how essential it is in a
flock of white sheep to destroy a lamb with the faintest trace of
black. We have seen how the colour of hogs, which feed on the
“paint-root” in Virginia, determines whether they shall live or die. In
plants, the down on the fruit and the colour of the flesh are
considered by botanists as characters of the most trifling importance;
yet we hear from an excellent horticulturist, Downing, that in the
United States smooth-skinned fruits suffer far more from a beetle, a
Curculio, than those with down; that purple plums suffer far more from
a certain disease than yellow plums; whereas another disease attacks
yellow-fleshed peaches far more than those with other coloured flesh.
If, with all the aids of art, these slight differences make a great
difference in cultivating the several varieties, assuredly, in a state
of nature, where the trees would have to struggle with other trees and
with a host of enemies, such differences would effectually settle which
variety, whether a smooth or downy, a yellow or a purple-fleshed fruit,
should succeed.

In looking at many small points of difference between species, which,
as far as our ignorance permits us to judge, seem quite unimportant, we
must not forget that climate, food, &c., have no doubt produced some
direct effect. It is also necessary to bear in mind that, owing to the
law of correlation, when one part varies and the variations are
accumulated through natural selection, other modifications, often of
the most unexpected nature, will ensue.

As we see that those variations which, under domestication, appear at
any particular period of life, tend to reappear in the offspring at the
same period; for instance, in the shape, size and flavour of the seeds
of the many varieties of our culinary and agricultural plants; in the
caterpillar and cocoon stages of the varieties of the silkworm; in the
eggs of poultry, and in the colour of the down of their chickens; in
the horns of our sheep and cattle when nearly adult; so in a state of
nature natural selection will be enabled to act on and modify organic
beings at any age, by the accumulation of variations profitable at that
age, and by their inheritance at a corresponding age. If it profit a
plant to have its seeds more and more widely disseminated by the wind,
I can see no greater difficulty in this being effected through natural
selection, than in the cotton-planter increasing and improving by
selection the down in the pods on his cotton-trees. Natural selection
may modify and adapt the larva of an insect to a score of
contingencies, wholly different from those which concern the mature
insect; and these modifications may affect, through correlation, the
structure of the adult. So, conversely, modifications in the adult may
affect the structure of the larva; but in all cases natural selection
will ensure that they shall not be injurious: for if they were so, the
species would become extinct.

Natural selection will modify the structure of the young in relation to
the parent and of the parent in relation to the young. In social
animals it will adapt the structure of each individual for the benefit
of the whole community; if the community profits by the selected
change. What natural selection cannot do, is to modify the structure of
one species, without giving it any advantage, for the good of another
species; and though statements to this effect may be found in works of
natural history, I cannot find one case which will bear investigation.
A structure used only once in an animal’s life, if of high importance
to it, might be modified to any extent by natural selection; for
instance, the great jaws possessed by certain insects, used exclusively
for opening the cocoon—or the hard tip to the beak of unhatched birds,
used for breaking the eggs. It has been asserted, that of the best
short-beaked tumbler-pigeons a greater number perish in the egg than
are able to get out of it; so that fanciers assist in the act of
hatching. Now, if nature had to make the beak of a full-grown pigeon
very short for the bird’s own advantage, the process of modification
would be very slow, and there would be simultaneously the most rigorous
selection of all the young birds within the egg, which had the most
powerful and hardest beaks, for all with weak beaks would inevitably
perish: or, more delicate and more easily broken shells might be
selected, the thickness of the shell being known to vary like every
other structure.

It may be well here to remark that with all beings there must be much
fortuitous destruction, which can have little or no influence on the
course of natural selection. For instance, a vast number of eggs or
seeds are annually devoured, and these could be modified through
natural selection only if they varied in some manner which protected
them from their enemies. Yet many of these eggs or seeds would perhaps,
if not destroyed, have yielded individuals better adapted to their
conditions of life than any of those which happened to survive. So
again a vast number of mature animals and plants, whether or not they
be the best adapted to their conditions, must be annually destroyed by
accidental causes, which would not be in the least degree mitigated by
certain changes of structure or constitution which would in other ways
be beneficial to the species. But let the destruction of the adults be
ever so heavy, if the number which can exist in any district be not
wholly kept down by such causes—or again let the destruction of eggs or
seeds be so great that only a hundredth or a thousandth part are
developed—yet of those which do survive, the best adapted individuals,
supposing that there is any variability in a favourable direction, will
tend to propagate their kind in larger numbers than the less well
adapted. If the numbers be wholly kept down by the causes just
indicated, as will often have been the case, natural selection will be
powerless in certain beneficial directions; but this is no valid
objection to its efficiency at other times and in other ways; for we
are far from having any reason to suppose that many species ever
undergo modification and improvement at the same time in the same area.

_Sexual Selection._

Inasmuch as peculiarities often appear under domestication in one sex
and become hereditarily attached to that sex, so no doubt it will be
under nature. Thus it is rendered possible for the two sexes to be
modified through natural selection in relation to different habits of
life, as is sometimes the case; or for one sex to be modified in
relation to the other sex, as commonly occurs. This leads me to say a
few words on what I have called sexual selection. This form of
selection depends, not on a struggle for existence in relation to other
organic beings or to external conditions, but on a struggle between the
individuals of one sex, generally the males, for the possession of the
other sex. The result is not death to the unsuccessful competitor, but
few or no offspring. Sexual selection is, therefore, less rigorous than
natural selection. Generally, the most vigorous males, those which are
best fitted for their places in nature, will leave most progeny. But in
many cases victory depends not so much on general vigour, but on having
special weapons, confined to the male sex. A hornless stag or spurless
cock would have a poor chance of leaving numerous offspring. Sexual
selection, by always allowing the victor to breed, might surely give
indomitable courage, length of spur, and strength to the wing to strike
in the spurred leg, in nearly the same manner as does the brutal
cockfighter by the careful selection of his best cocks. How low in the
scale of nature the law of battle descends I know not; male alligators
have been described as fighting, bellowing, and whirling round, like
Indians in a war-dance, for the possession of the females; male salmons
have been observed fighting all day long; male stag-beetles sometimes
bear wounds from the huge mandibles of other males; the males of
certain hymenopterous insects have been frequently seen by that
inimitable observer M. Fabre, fighting for a particular female who sits
by, an apparently unconcerned beholder of the struggle, and then
retires with the conqueror. The war is, perhaps, severest between the
males of polygamous animals, and these seem oftenest provided with
special weapons. The males of carnivorous animals are already well
armed; though to them and to others, special means of defence may be
given through means of sexual selection, as the mane of the lion, and
the hooked jaw to the male salmon; for the shield may be as important
for victory as the sword or spear.

Among birds, the contest is often of a more peaceful character. All
those who have attended to the subject, believe that there is the
severest rivalry between the males of many species to attract, by
singing, the females. The rock-thrush of Guiana, birds of paradise, and
some others, congregate, and successive males display with the most
elaborate care, and show off in the best manner, their gorgeous
plumage; they likewise perform strange antics before the females,
which, standing by as spectators, at last choose the most attractive
partner. Those who have closely attended to birds in confinement well
know that they often take individual preferences and dislikes: thus Sir
R. Heron has described how a pied peacock was eminently attractive to
all his hen birds. I cannot here enter on the necessary details; but if
man can in a short time give beauty and an elegant carriage to his
bantams, according to his standard of beauty, I can see no good reason
to doubt that female birds, by selecting, during thousands of
generations, the most melodious or beautiful males, according to their
standard of beauty, might produce a marked effect. Some well-known
laws, with respect to the plumage of male and female birds, in
comparison with the plumage of the young, can partly be explained
through the action of sexual selection on variations occurring at
different ages, and transmitted to the males alone or to both sexes at
corresponding ages; but I have not space here to enter on this subject.

Thus it is, as I believe, that when the males and females of any animal
have the same general habits of life, but differ in structure, colour,
or ornament, such differences have been mainly caused by sexual
selection: that is, by individual males having had, in successive
generations, some slight advantage over other males, in their weapons,
means of defence, or charms; which they have transmitted to their male
offspring alone. Yet, I would not wish to attribute all sexual
differences to this agency: for we see in our domestic animals
peculiarities arising and becoming attached to the male sex, which
apparently have not been augmented through selection by man. The tuft
of hair on the breast of the wild turkey-cock cannot be of any use, and
it is doubtful whether it can be ornamental in the eyes of the female
bird; indeed, had the tuft appeared under domestication it would have
been called a monstrosity.

_Illustrations of the Action of Natural Selection, or the Survival of
the Fittest._

In order to make it clear how, as I believe, natural selection acts, I
must beg permission to give one or two imaginary illustrations. Let us
take the case of a wolf, which preys on various animals, securing some
by craft, some by strength, and some by fleetness; and let us suppose
that the fleetest prey, a deer for instance, had from any change in the
country increased in numbers, or that other prey had decreased in
numbers, during that season of the year when the wolf was hardest
pressed for food. Under such circumstances the swiftest and slimmest
wolves have the best chance of surviving, and so be preserved or
selected, provided always that they retained strength to master their
prey at this or some other period of the year, when they were compelled
to prey on other animals. I can see no more reason to doubt that this
would be the result, than that man should be able to improve the
fleetness of his greyhounds by careful and methodical selection, or by
that kind of unconscious selection which follows from each man trying
to keep the best dogs without any thought of modifying the breed. I may
add that, according to Mr. Pierce, there are two varieties of the wolf
inhabiting the Catskill Mountains, in the United States, one with a
light greyhound-like form, which pursues deer, and the other more
bulky, with shorter legs, which more frequently attacks the shepherd’s
flocks.

Even without any change in the proportional numbers of the animals on
which our wolf preyed, a cub might be born with an innate tendency to
pursue certain kinds of prey. Nor can this be thought very improbable;
for we often observe great differences in the natural tendencies of our
domestic animals; one cat, for instance, taking to catch rats, another
mice; one cat, according to Mr. St. John, bringing home winged game,
another hares or rabbits, and another hunting on marshy ground and
almost nightly catching woodcocks or snipes. The tendency to catch rats
rather than mice is known to be inherited. Now, if any slight innate
change of habit or of structure benefited an individual wolf, it would
have the best chance of surviving and of leaving offspring. Some of its
young would probably inherit the same habits or structure, and by the
repetition of this process, a new variety might be formed which would
either supplant or coexist with the parent-form of wolf. Or, again, the
wolves inhabiting a mountainous district, and those frequenting the
lowlands, would naturally be forced to hunt different prey; and from
the continued preservation of the individuals best fitted for the two
sites, two varieties might slowly be formed. These varieties would
cross and blend where they met; but to this subject of intercrossing we
shall soon have to return. I may add, that, according to Mr. Pierce,
there are two varieties of the wolf inhabiting the Catskill Mountains
in the United States, one with a light greyhound-like form, which
pursues deer, and the other more bulky, with shorter legs, which more
frequently attacks the shepherd’s flocks.

It should be observed that in the above illustration, I speak of the
slimmest individual wolves, and not of any single strongly marked
variation having been preserved. In former editions of this work I
sometimes spoke as if this latter alternative had frequently occurred.
I saw the great importance of individual differences, and this led me
fully to discuss the results of unconscious selection by man, which
depends on the preservation of all the more or less valuable
individuals, and on the destruction of the worst. I saw, also, that the
preservation in a state of nature of any occasional deviation of
structure, such as a monstrosity, would be a rare event; and that, if
at first preserved, it would generally be lost by subsequent
intercrossing with ordinary individuals. Nevertheless, until reading an
able and valuable article in the “North British Review” (1867), I did
not appreciate how rarely single variations, whether slight or strongly
marked, could be perpetuated. The author takes the case of a pair of
animals, producing during their lifetime two hundred offspring, of
which, from various causes of destruction, only two on an average
survive to pro-create their kind. This is rather an extreme estimate
for most of the higher animals, but by no means so for many of the
lower organisms. He then shows that if a single individual were born,
which varied in some manner, giving it twice as good a chance of life
as that of the other individuals, yet the chances would be strongly
against its survival. Supposing it to survive and to breed, and that
half its young inherited the favourable variation; still, as the
Reviewer goes onto show, the young would have only a slightly better
chance of surviving and breeding; and this chance would go on
decreasing in the succeeding generations. The justice of these remarks
cannot, I think, be disputed. If, for instance, a bird of some kind
could procure its food more easily by having its beak curved, and if
one were born with its beak strongly curved, and which consequently
flourished, nevertheless there would be a very poor chance of this one
individual perpetuating its kind to the exclusion of the common form;
but there can hardly be a doubt, judging by what we see taking place
under domestication, that this result would follow from the
preservation during many generations of a large number of individuals
with more or less strongly curved beaks, and from the destruction of a
still larger number with the straightest beaks.

It should not, however, be overlooked that certain rather strongly
marked variations, which no one would rank as mere individual
differences, frequently recur owing to a similar organisation being
similarly acted on—of which fact numerous instances could be given with
our domestic productions. In such cases, if the varying individual did
not actually transmit to its offspring its newly-acquired character, it
would undoubtedly transmit to them, as long as the existing conditions
remained the same, a still stronger tendency to vary in the same
manner. There can also be little doubt that the tendency to vary in the
same manner has often been so strong that all the individuals of the
same species have been similarly modified without the aid of any form
of selection. Or only a third, fifth, or tenth part of the individuals
may have been thus affected, of which fact several instances could be
given. Thus Graba estimates that about one-fifth of the guillemots in
the Faroe Islands consist of a variety so well marked, that it was
formerly ranked as a distinct species under the name of Uria lacrymans.
In cases of this kind, if the variation were of a beneficial nature,
the original form would soon be supplanted by the modified form,
through the survival of the fittest.

To the effects of intercrossing in eliminating variations of all kinds,
I shall have to recur; but it may be here remarked that most animals
and plants keep to their proper homes, and do not needlessly wander
about; we see this even with migratory birds, which almost always
return to the same spot. Consequently each newly-formed variety would
generally be at first local, as seems to be the common rule with
varieties in a state of nature; so that similarly modified individuals
would soon exist in a small body together, and would often breed
together. If the new variety were successful in its battle for life, it
would slowly spread from a central district, competing with and
conquering the unchanged individuals on the margins of an
ever-increasing circle.

It may be worth while to give another and more complex illustration of
the action of natural selection. Certain plants excrete sweet juice,
apparently for the sake of eliminating something injurious from the
sap: this is effected, for instance, by glands at the base of the
stipules in some Leguminosæ, and at the backs of the leaves of the
common laurel. This juice, though small in quantity, is greedily sought
by insects; but their visits do not in any way benefit the plant. Now,
let us suppose that the juice or nectar was excreted from the inside of
the flowers of a certain number of plants of any species. Insects in
seeking the nectar would get dusted with pollen, and would often
transport it from one flower to another. The flowers of two distinct
individuals of the same species would thus get crossed; and the act of
crossing, as can be fully proved, gives rise to vigorous seedlings,
which consequently would have the best chance of flourishing and
surviving. The plants which produced flowers with the largest glands or
nectaries, excreting most nectar, would oftenest be visited by insects,
and would oftenest be crossed; and so in the long-run would gain the
upper hand and form a local variety. The flowers, also, which had their
stamens and pistils placed, in relation to the size and habits of the
particular insect which visited them, so as to favour in any degree the
transportal of the pollen, would likewise be favoured. We might have
taken the case of insects visiting flowers for the sake of collecting
pollen instead of nectar; and as pollen is formed for the sole purpose
of fertilisation, its destruction appears to be a simple loss to the
plant; yet if a little pollen were carried, at first occasionally and
then habitually, by the pollen-devouring insects from flower to flower,
and a cross thus effected, although nine-tenths of the pollen were
destroyed it might still be a great gain to the plant to be thus
robbed; and the individuals which produced more and more pollen, and
had larger anthers, would be selected.

When our plant, by the above process long continued, had been rendered
highly attractive to insects, they would, unintentionally on their
part, regularly carry pollen from flower to flower; and that they do
this effectually I could easily show by many striking facts. I will
give only one, as likewise illustrating one step in the separation of
the sexes of plants. Some holly-trees bear only male flowers, which
have four stamens producing a rather small quantity of pollen, and a
rudimentary pistil; other holly-trees bear only female flowers; these
have a full-sized pistil, and four stamens with shrivelled anthers, in
which not a grain of pollen can be detected. Having found a female tree
exactly sixty yards from a male tree, I put the stigmas of twenty
flowers, taken from different branches, under the microscope, and on
all, without exception, there were a few pollen-grains, and on some a
profusion. As the wind had set for several days from the female to the
male tree, the pollen could not thus have been carried. The weather had
been cold and boisterous and therefore not favourable to bees,
nevertheless every female flower which I examined had been effectually
fertilised by the bees, which had flown from tree to tree in search of
nectar. But to return to our imaginary case; as soon as the plant had
been rendered so highly attractive to insects that pollen was regularly
carried from flower to flower, another process might commence. No
naturalist doubts the advantage of what has been called the
“physiological division of labour;” hence we may believe that it would
be advantageous to a plant to produce stamens alone in one flower or on
one whole plant, and pistils alone in another flower or on another
plant. In plants under culture and placed under new conditions of life,
sometimes the male organs and sometimes the female organs become more
or less impotent; now if we suppose this to occur in ever so slight a
degree under nature, then, as pollen is already carried regularly from
flower to flower, and as a more complete separation of the sexes of our
plant would be advantageous on the principle of the division of labour,
individuals with this tendency more and more increased, would be
continually favoured or selected, until at last a complete separation
of the sexes might be effected. It would take up too much space to show
the various steps, through dimorphism and other means, by which the
separation of the sexes in plants of various kinds is apparently now in
progress; but I may add that some of the species of holly in North
America are, according to Asa Gray, in an exactly intermediate
condition, or, as he expresses it, are more or less dioeciously
polygamous.

Let us now turn to the nectar-feeding insects; we may suppose the plant
of which we have been slowly increasing the nectar by continued
selection, to be a common plant; and that certain insects depended in
main part on its nectar for food. I could give many facts showing how
anxious bees are to save time: for instance, their habit of cutting
holes and sucking the nectar at the bases of certain flowers, which
with a very little more trouble they can enter by the mouth. Bearing
such facts in mind, it may be believed that under certain circumstances
individual differences in the curvature or length of the proboscis,
&c., too slight to be appreciated by us, might profit a bee or other
insect, so that certain individuals would be able to obtain their food
more quickly than others; and thus the communities to which they
belonged would flourish and throw off many swarms inheriting the same
peculiarities. The tubes of the corolla of the common red or incarnate
clovers (Trifolium pratense and incarnatum) do not on a hasty glance
appear to differ in length; yet the hive-bee can easily suck the nectar
out of the incarnate clover, but not out of the common red clover,
which is visited by humble-bees alone; so that whole fields of the red
clover offer in vain an abundant supply of precious nectar to the
hive-bee. That this nectar is much liked by the hive-bee is certain;
for I have repeatedly seen, but only in the autumn, many hive-bees
sucking the flowers through holes bitten in the base of the tube by
humble bees. The difference in the length of the corolla in the two
kinds of clover, which determines the visits of the hive-bee, must be
very trifling; for I have been assured that when red clover has been
mown, the flowers of the second crop are somewhat smaller, and that
these are visited by many hive-bees. I do not know whether this
statement is accurate; nor whether another published statement can be
trusted, namely, that the Ligurian bee, which is generally considered a
mere variety of the common hive-bee, and which freely crosses with it,
is able to reach and suck the nectar of the red clover. Thus, in a
country where this kind of clover abounded, it might be a great
advantage to the hive-bee to have a slightly longer or differently
constructed proboscis. On the other hand, as the fertility of this
clover absolutely depends on bees visiting the flowers, if humble-bees
were to become rare in any country, it might be a great advantage to
the plant to have a shorter or more deeply divided corolla, so that the
hive-bees should be enabled to suck its flowers. Thus I can understand
how a flower and a bee might slowly become, either simultaneously or
one after the other, modified and adapted to each other in the most
perfect manner, by the continued preservation of all the individuals
which presented slight deviations of structure mutually favourable to
each other.

I am well aware that this doctrine of natural selection, exemplified in
the above imaginary instances, is open to the same objections which
were first urged against Sir Charles Lyell’s noble views on “the modern
changes of the earth, as illustrative of geology;” but we now seldom
hear the agencies which we see still at work, spoken of as trifling and
insignificant, when used in explaining the excavation of the deepest
valleys or the formation of long lines of inland cliffs. Natural
selection acts only by the preservation and accumulation of small
inherited modifications, each profitable to the preserved being; and as
modern geology has almost banished such views as the excavation of a
great valley by a single diluvial wave, so will natural selection
banish the belief of the continued creation of new organic beings, or
of any great and sudden modification in their structure.

_On the Intercrossing of Individuals._

I must here introduce a short digression. In the case of animals and
plants with separated sexes, it is of course obvious that two
individuals must always (with the exception of the curious and not well
understood cases of parthenogenesis) unite for each birth; but in the
case of hermaphrodites this is far from obvious. Nevertheless there is
reason to believe that with all hermaphrodites two individuals, either
occasionally or habitually, concur for the reproduction of their kind.
This view was long ago doubtfully suggested by Sprengel, Knight and
Kölreuter. We shall presently see its importance; but I must here treat
the subject with extreme brevity, though I have the materials prepared
for an ample discussion. All vertebrate animals, all insects and some
other large groups of animals, pair for each birth. Modern research has
much diminished the number of supposed hermaphrodites and of real
hermaphrodites a large number pair; that is, two individuals regularly
unite for reproduction, which is all that concerns us. But still there
are many hermaphrodite animals which certainly do not habitually pair,
and a vast majority of plants are hermaphrodites. What reason, it may
be asked, is there for supposing in these cases that two individuals
ever concur in reproduction? As it is impossible here to enter on
details, I must trust to some general considerations alone.

In the first place, I have collected so large a body of facts, and made
so many experiments, showing, in accordance with the almost universal
belief of breeders, that with animals and plants a cross between
different varieties, or between individuals of the same variety but of
another strain, gives vigour and fertility to the offspring; and on the
other hand, that _close_ interbreeding diminishes vigour and fertility;
that these facts alone incline me to believe that it is a general law
of nature that no organic being fertilises itself for a perpetuity of
generations; but that a cross with another individual is
occasionally—perhaps at long intervals of time—indispensable.

On the belief that this is a law of nature, we can, I think, understand
several large classes of facts, such as the following, which on any
other view are inexplicable. Every hybridizer knows how unfavourable
exposure to wet is to the fertilisation of a flower, yet what a
multitude of flowers have their anthers and stigmas fully exposed to
the weather! If an occasional cross be indispensable, notwithstanding
that the plant’s own anthers and pistil stand so near each other as
almost to ensure self-fertilisation, the fullest freedom for the
entrance of pollen from another individual will explain the above state
of exposure of the organs. Many flowers, on the other hand, have their
organs of fructification closely enclosed, as in the great
papilionaceous or pea-family; but these almost invariably present
beautiful and curious adaptations in relation to the visits of insects.
So necessary are the visits of bees to many papilionaceous flowers,
that their fertility is greatly diminished if these visits be
prevented. Now, it is scarcely possible for insects to fly from flower
to flower, and not to carry pollen from one to the other, to the great
good of the plant. Insects act like a camel-hair pencil, and it is
sufficient, to ensure fertilisation, just to touch with the same brush
the anthers of one flower and then the stigma of another; but it must
not be supposed that bees would thus produce a multitude of hybrids
between distinct species; for if a plant’s own pollen and that from
another species are placed on the same stigma, the former is so
prepotent that it invariably and completely destroys, as has been shown
by Gärtner, the influence of the foreign pollen.

When the stamens of a flower suddenly spring towards the pistil, or
slowly move one after the other towards it, the contrivance seems
adapted solely to ensure self-fertilisation; and no doubt it is useful
for this end: but the agency of insects is often required to cause the
stamens to spring forward, as Kölreuter has shown to be the case with
the barberry; and in this very genus, which seems to have a special
contrivance for self-fertilisation, it is well known that, if
closely-allied forms or varieties are planted near each other, it is
hardly possible to raise pure seedlings, so largely do they naturally
cross. In numerous other cases, far from self-fertilisation being
favoured, there are special contrivances which effectually prevent the
stigma receiving pollen from its own flower, as I could show from the
works of Sprengel and others, as well as from my own observations: for
instance, in Lobelia fulgens, there is a really beautiful and elaborate
contrivance by which all the infinitely numerous pollen-granules are
swept out of the conjoined anthers of each flower, before the stigma of
that individual flower is ready to receive them; and as this flower is
never visited, at least in my garden, by insects, it never sets a seed,
though by placing pollen from one flower on the stigma of another, I
raise plenty of seedlings. Another species of Lobelia, which is visited
by bees, seeds freely in my garden. In very many other cases, though
there is no special mechanical contrivance to prevent the stigma
receiving pollen from the same flower, yet, as Sprengel, and more
recently Hildebrand and others have shown, and as I can confirm, either
the anthers burst before the stigma is ready for fertilisation, or the
stigma is ready before the pollen of that flower is ready, so that
these so-named dichogamous plants have in fact separated sexes, and
must habitually be crossed. So it is with the reciprocally dimorphic
and trimorphic plants previously alluded to. How strange are these
facts! How strange that the pollen and stigmatic surface of the same
flower, though placed so close together, as if for the very purpose of
self-fertilisation, should be in so many cases mutually useless to each
other! How simply are these facts explained on the view of an
occasional cross with a distinct individual being advantageous or
indispensable!

If several varieties of the cabbage, radish, onion, and of some other
plants, be allowed to seed near each other, a large majority of the
seedlings thus raised turn out, as I found, mongrels: for instance, I
raised 233 seedling cabbages from some plants of different varieties
growing near each other, and of these only 78 were true to their kind,
and some even of these were not perfectly true. Yet the pistil of each
cabbage-flower is surrounded not only by its own six stamens but by
those of the many other flowers on the same plant; and the pollen of
each flower readily gets on its stigma without insect agency; for I
have found that plants carefully protected from insects produce the
full number of pods. How, then, comes it that such a vast number of the
seedlings are mongrelized? It must arise from the pollen of a distinct
_variety_ having a prepotent effect over the flower’s own pollen; and
that this is part of the general law of good being derived from the
intercrossing of distinct individuals of the same species. When
distinct _species_ are crossed the case is reversed, for a plant’s own
pollen is always prepotent over foreign pollen; but to this subject we
shall return in a future chapter.

In the case of a large tree covered with innumerable flowers, it may be
objected that pollen could seldom be carried from tree to tree, and at
most only from flower to flower on the same tree; and flowers on the
same tree can be considered as distinct individuals only in a limited
sense. I believe this objection to be valid, but that nature has
largely provided against it by giving to trees a strong tendency to
bear flowers with separated sexes. When the sexes are separated,
although the male and female flowers may be produced on the same tree,
pollen must be regularly carried from flower to flower; and this will
give a better chance of pollen being occasionally carried from tree to
tree. That trees belonging to all orders have their sexes more often
separated than other plants, I find to be the case in this country; and
at my request Dr. Hooker tabulated the trees of New Zealand, and Dr.
Asa Gray those of the United States, and the result was as I
anticipated. On the other hand, Dr. Hooker informs me that the rule
does not hold good in Australia: but if most of the Australian trees
are dichogamous, the same result would follow as if they bore flowers
with separated sexes. I have made these few remarks on trees simply to
call attention to the subject.

Turning for a brief space to animals: various terrestrial species are
hermaphrodites, such as the land-mollusca and earth-worms; but these
all pair. As yet I have not found a single terrestrial animal which can
fertilise itself. This remarkable fact, which offers so strong a
contrast with terrestrial plants, is intelligible on the view of an
occasional cross being indispensable; for owing to the nature of the
fertilising element there are no means, analogous to the action of
insects and of the wind with plants, by which an occasional cross could
be effected with terrestrial animals without the concurrence of two
individuals. Of aquatic animals, there are many self-fertilising
hermaphrodites; but here the currents of water offer an obvious means
for an occasional cross. As in the case of flowers, I have as yet
failed, after consultation with one of the highest authorities, namely,
Professor Huxley, to discover a single hermaphrodite animal with the
organs of reproduction so perfectly enclosed that access from without,
and the occasional influence of a distinct individual, can be shown to
be physically impossible. Cirripedes long appeared to me to present,
under this point of view, a case of great difficulty; but I have been
enabled, by a fortunate chance, to prove that two individuals, though
both are self-fertilising hermaphrodites, do sometimes cross.

It must have struck most naturalists as a strange anomaly that, both
with animals and plants, some species of the same family and even of
the same genus, though agreeing closely with each other in their whole
organisation, are hermaphrodites, and some unisexual. But if, in fact,
all hermaphrodites do occasionally intercross, the difference between
them and unisexual species is, as far as function is concerned, very
small.

From these several considerations and from the many special facts which
I have collected, but which I am unable here to give, it appears that
with animals and plants an occasional intercross between distinct
individuals is a very general, if not universal, law of nature.

_Circumstances favourable for the production of new forms through
Natural Selection._

This is an extremely intricate subject. A great amount of variability,
under which term individual differences are always included, will
evidently be favourable. A large number of individuals, by giving a
better chance within any given period for the appearance of profitable
variations, will compensate for a lesser amount of variability in each
individual, and is, I believe, a highly important element of success.
Though nature grants long periods of time for the work of natural
selection, she does not grant an indefinite period; for as all organic
beings are striving to seize on each place in the economy of nature, if
any one species does not become modified and improved in a
corresponding degree with its competitors it will be exterminated.
Unless favourable variations be inherited by some at least of the
offspring, nothing can be effected by natural selection. The tendency
to reversion may often check or prevent the work; but as this tendency
has not prevented man from forming by selection numerous domestic
races, why should it prevail against natural selection?

In the case of methodical selection, a breeder selects for some
definite object, and if the individuals be allowed freely to
intercross, his work will completely fail. But when many men, without
intending to alter the breed, have a nearly common standard of
perfection, and all try to procure and breed from the best animals,
improvement surely but slowly follows from this unconscious process of
selection, notwithstanding that there is no separation of selected
individuals. Thus it will be under nature; for within a confined area,
with some place in the natural polity not perfectly occupied, all the
individuals varying in the right direction, though in different
degrees, will tend to be preserved. But if the area be large, its
several districts will almost certainly present different conditions of
life; and then, if the same species undergoes modification in different
districts, the newly formed varieties will intercross on the confines
of each. But we shall see in the sixth chapter that intermediate
varieties, inhabiting intermediate districts, will in the long run
generally be supplanted by one of the adjoining varieties.
Intercrossing will chiefly affect those animals which unite for each
birth and wander much, and which do not breed at a very quick rate.
Hence with animals of this nature, for instance birds, varieties will
generally be confined to separated countries; and this I find to be the
case. With hermaphrodite organisms which cross only occasionally, and
likewise with animals which unite for each birth, but which wander
little and can increase at a rapid rate, a new and improved variety
might be quickly formed on any one spot, and might there maintain
itself in a body and afterward spread, so that the individuals of the
new variety would chiefly cross together. On this principle nurserymen
always prefer saving seed from a large body of plants, as the chance of
intercrossing is thus lessened.

Even with animals which unite for each birth, and which do not
propagate rapidly, we must not assume that free intercrossing would
always eliminate the effects of natural selection; for I can bring
forward a considerable body of facts showing that within the same area
two varieties of the same animal may long remain distinct, from
haunting different stations, from breeding at slightly different
seasons, or from the individuals of each variety preferring to pair
together.

Intercrossing plays a very important part in nature by keeping the
individuals of the same species, or of the same variety, true and
uniform in character. It will obviously thus act far more efficiently
with those animals which unite for each birth; but, as already stated,
we have reason to believe that occasional intercrosses take place with
all animals and plants. Even if these take place only at long intervals
of time, the young thus produced will gain so much in vigour and
fertility over the offspring from long-continued self-fertilisation,
that they will have a better chance of surviving and propagating their
kind; and thus in the long run the influence of crosses, even at rare
intervals, will be great. With respect to organic beings extremely low
in the scale, which do not propagate sexually, nor conjugate, and which
cannot possibly intercross, uniformity of character can be retained by
them under the same conditions of life, only through the principle of
inheritance, and through natural selection which will destroy any
individuals departing from the proper type. If the conditions of life
change and the form undergoes modification, uniformity of character can
be given to the modified offspring, solely by natural selection
preserving similar favourable variations.

Isolation also is an important element in the modification of species
through natural selection. In a confined or isolated area, if not very
large, the organic and inorganic conditions of life will generally be
almost uniform; so that natural selection will tend to modify all the
varying individuals of the same species in the same manner.
Intercrossing with the inhabitants of the surrounding districts, will
also be thus prevented. Moritz Wagner has lately published an
interesting essay on this subject, and has shown that the service
rendered by isolation in preventing crosses between newly-formed
varieties is probably greater even than I supposed. But from reasons
already assigned I can by no means agree with this naturalist, that
migration and isolation are necessary elements for the formation of new
species. The importance of isolation is likewise great in preventing,
after any physical change in the conditions, such as of climate,
elevation of the land, &c., the immigration of better adapted
organisms; and thus new places in the natural economy of the district
will be left open to be filled up by the modification of the old
inhabitants. Lastly, isolation will give time for a new variety to be
improved at a slow rate; and this may sometimes be of much importance.
If, however, an isolated area be very small, either from being
surrounded by barriers, or from having very peculiar physical
conditions, the total number of the inhabitants will be small; and this
will retard the production of new species through natural selection, by
decreasing the chances of favourable variations arising.

The mere lapse of time by itself does nothing, either for or against
natural selection. I state this because it has been erroneously
asserted that the element of time has been assumed by me to play an
all-important part in modifying species, as if all the forms of life
were necessarily undergoing change through some innate law. Lapse of
time is only so far important, and its importance in this respect is
great, that it gives a better chance of beneficial variations arising
and of their being selected, accumulated, and fixed. It likewise tends
to increase the direct action of the physical conditions of life, in
relation to the constitution of each organism.

If we turn to nature to test the truth of these remarks, and look at
any small isolated area, such as an oceanic island, although the number
of the species inhabiting it is small, as we shall see in our chapter
on Geographical Distribution; yet of these species a very large
proportion are endemic,—that is, have been produced there and nowhere
else in the world. Hence an oceanic island at first sight seems to have
been highly favourable for the production of new species. But we may
thus deceive ourselves, for to ascertain whether a small isolated area,
or a large open area like a continent, has been most favourable for the
production of new organic forms, we ought to make the comparison within
equal times; and this we are incapable of doing.

Although isolation is of great importance in the production of new
species, on the whole I am inclined to believe that largeness of area
is still more important, especially for the production of species which
shall prove capable of enduring for a long period, and of spreading
widely. Throughout a great and open area, not only will there be a
better chance of favourable variations, arising from the large number
of individuals of the same species there supported, but the conditions
of life are much more complex from the large number of already existing
species; and if some of these many species become modified and
improved, others will have to be improved in a corresponding degree, or
they will be exterminated. Each new form, also, as soon as it has been
much improved, will be able to spread over the open and continuous
area, and will thus come into competition with many other forms.
Moreover, great areas, though now continuous, will often, owing to
former oscillations of level, have existed in a broken condition, so
that the good effects of isolation will generally, to a certain extent,
have concurred. Finally, I conclude that, although small isolated areas
have been in some respects highly favourable for the production of new
species, yet that the course of modification will generally have been
more rapid on large areas; and what is more important, that the new
forms produced on large areas, which already have been victorious over
many competitors, will be those that will spread most widely, and will
give rise to the greatest number of new varieties and species. They
will thus play a more important part in the changing history of the
organic world.

In accordance with this view, we can, perhaps, understand some facts
which will be again alluded to in our chapter on Geographical
Distribution; for instance, the fact of the productions of the smaller
continent of Australia now yielding before those of the larger
Europæo-Asiatic area. Thus, also, it is that continental productions
have everywhere become so largely naturalised on islands. On a small
island, the race for life will have been less severe, and there will
have been less modification and less extermination. Hence, we can
understand how it is that the flora of Madeira, according to Oswald
Heer, resembles to a certain extent the extinct tertiary flora of
Europe. All fresh water basins, taken together, make a small area
compared with that of the sea or of the land. Consequently, the
competition between fresh water productions will have been less severe
than elsewhere; new forms will have been more slowly produced, and old
forms more slowly exterminated. And it is in fresh water basins that we
find seven genera of Ganoid fishes, remnants of a once preponderant
order: and in fresh water we find some of the most anomalous forms now
known in the world, as the Ornithorhynchus and Lepidosiren, which, like
fossils, connect to a certain extent orders at present widely separated
in the natural scale. These anomalous forms may be called living
fossils; they have endured to the present day, from having inhabited a
confined area, and from having been exposed to less varied, and
therefore less severe, competition.

To sum up, as far as the extreme intricacy of the subject permits, the
circumstances favourable and unfavourable for the production of new
species through natural selection. I conclude that for terrestrial
productions a large continental area, which has undergone many
oscillations of level, will have been the most favourable for the
production of many new forms of life, fitted to endure for a long time
and to spread widely. While the area existed as a continent the
inhabitants will have been numerous in individuals and kinds, and will
have been subjected to severe competition. When converted by subsidence
into large separate islands there will still have existed many
individuals of the same species on each island: intercrossing on the
confines of the range of each new species will have been checked: after
physical changes of any kind immigration will have been prevented, so
that new places in the polity of each island will have had to be filled
up by the modification of the old inhabitants; and time will have been
allowed for the varieties in each to become well modified and
perfected. When, by renewed elevation, the islands were reconverted
into a continental area, there will again have been very severe
competition; the most favoured or improved varieties will have been
enabled to spread; there will have been much extinction of the less
improved forms, and the relative proportional numbers of the various
inhabitants of the reunited continent will again have been changed; and
again there will have been a fair field for natural selection to
improve still further the inhabitants, and thus to produce new species.

That natural selection generally act with extreme slowness I fully
admit. It can act only when there are places in the natural polity of a
district which can be better occupied by the modification of some of
its existing inhabitants. The occurrence of such places will often
depend on physical changes, which generally take place very slowly, and
on the immigration of better adapted forms being prevented. As some few
of the old inhabitants become modified the mutual relations of others
will often be disturbed; and this will create new places, ready to be
filled up by better adapted forms; but all this will take place very
slowly. Although all the individuals of the same species differ in some
slight degree from each other, it would often be long before
differences of the right nature in various parts of the organisation
might occur. The result would often be greatly retarded by free
intercrossing. Many will exclaim that these several causes are amply
sufficient to neutralise the power of natural selection. I do not
believe so. But I do believe that natural selection will generally act
very slowly, only at long intervals of time, and only on a few of the
inhabitants of the same region. I further believe that these slow,
intermittent results accord well with what geology tells us of the rate
and manner at which the inhabitants of the world have changed.

Slow though the process of selection may be, if feeble man can do much
by artificial selection, I can see no limit to the amount of change, to
the beauty and complexity of the coadaptations between all organic
beings, one with another and with their physical conditions of life,
which may have been effected in the long course of time through
nature’s power of selection, that is by the survival of the fittest.

_Extinction caused by Natural Selection._

This subject will be more fully discussed in our chapter on Geology;
but it must here be alluded to from being intimately connected with
natural selection. Natural selection acts solely through the
preservation of variations in some way advantageous, which consequently
endure. Owing to the high geometrical rate of increase of all organic
beings, each area is already fully stocked with inhabitants, and it
follows from this, that as the favoured forms increase in number, so,
generally, will the less favoured decrease and become rare. Rarity, as
geology tells us, is the precursor to extinction. We can see that any
form which is represented by few individuals will run a good chance of
utter extinction, during great fluctuations in the nature or the
seasons, or from a temporary increase in the number of its enemies. But
we may go further than this; for as new forms are produced, unless we
admit that specific forms can go on indefinitely increasing in number,
many old forms must become extinct. That the number of specific forms
has not indefinitely increased, geology plainly tells us; and we shall
presently attempt to show why it is that the number of species
throughout the world has not become immeasurably great.

We have seen that the species which are most numerous in individuals
have the best chance of producing favourable variations within any
given period. We have evidence of this, in the facts stated in the
second chapter, showing that it is the common and diffused or dominant
species which offer the greatest number of recorded varieties. Hence,
rare species will be less quickly modified or improved within any given
period; they will consequently be beaten in the race for life by the
modified and improved descendants of the commoner species.

From these several considerations I think it inevitably follows, that
as new species in the course of time are formed through natural
selection, others will become rarer and rarer, and finally extinct. The
forms which stand in closest competition with those undergoing
modification and improvement, will naturally suffer most. And we have
seen in the chapter on the Struggle for Existence that it is the most
closely-allied forms,—varieties of the same species, and species of the
same genus or related genera,—which, from having nearly the same
structure, constitution and habits, generally come into the severest
competition with each other. Consequently, each new variety or species,
during the progress of its formation, will generally press hardest on
its nearest kindred, and tend to exterminate them. We see the same
process of extermination among our domesticated productions, through
the selection of improved forms by man. Many curious instances could be
given showing how quickly new breeds of cattle, sheep and other
animals, and varieties of flowers, take the place of older and inferior
kinds. In Yorkshire, it is historically known that the ancient black
cattle were displaced by the long-horns, and that these “were swept
away by the short-horns” (I quote the words of an agricultural writer)
“as if by some murderous pestilence.”

_Divergence of Character._

The principle, which I have designated by this term, is of high
importance, and explains, as I believe, several important facts. In the
first place, varieties, even strongly-marked ones, though having
somewhat of the character of species—as is shown by the hopeless doubts
in many cases how to rank them—yet certainly differ far less from each
other than do good and distinct species. Nevertheless according to my
view, varieties are species in the process of formation, or are, as I
have called them, incipient species. How, then, does the lesser
difference between varieties become augmented into the greater
difference between species? That this does habitually happen, we must
infer from most of the innumerable species throughout nature presenting
well-marked differences; whereas varieties, the supposed prototypes and
parents of future well-marked species, present slight and ill-defined
differences. Mere chance, as we may call it, might cause one variety to
differ in some character from its parents, and the offspring of this
variety again to differ from its parent in the very same character and
in a greater degree; but this alone would never account for so habitual
and large a degree of difference as that between the species of the
same genus.

As has always been my practice, I have sought light on this head from
our domestic productions. We shall here find something analogous. It
will be admitted that the production of races so different as
short-horn and Hereford cattle, race and cart horses, the several
breeds of pigeons, &c., could never have been effected by the mere
chance accumulation of similar variations during many successive
generations. In practice, a fancier is, for instance, struck by a
pigeon having a slightly shorter beak; another fancier is struck by a
pigeon having a rather longer beak; and on the acknowledged principle
that “fanciers do not and will not admire a medium standard, but like
extremes,” they both go on (as has actually occurred with the
sub-breeds of the tumbler-pigeon) choosing and breeding from birds with
longer and longer beaks, or with shorter and shorter beaks. Again, we
may suppose that at an early period of history, the men of one nation
or district required swifter horses, while those of another required
stronger and bulkier horses. The early differences would be very
slight; but, in the course of time, from the continued selection of
swifter horses in the one case, and of stronger ones in the other, the
differences would become greater, and would be noted as forming two
sub-breeds. Ultimately after the lapse of centuries, these sub-breeds
would become converted into two well-established and distinct breeds.
As the differences became greater, the inferior animals with
intermediate characters, being neither very swift nor very strong,
would not have been used for breeding, and will thus have tended to
disappear. Here, then, we see in man’s productions the action of what
may be called the principle of divergence, causing differences, at
first barely appreciable, steadily to increase, and the breeds to
diverge in character, both from each other and from their common
parent.

But how, it may be asked, can any analogous principle apply in nature?
I believe it can and does apply most efficiently (though it was a long
time before I saw how), from the simple circumstance that the more
diversified the descendants from any one species become in structure,
constitution, and habits, by so much will they be better enabled to
seize on many and widely diversified places in the polity of nature,
and so be enabled to increase in numbers.

We can clearly discern this in the case of animals with simple habits.
Take the case of a carnivorous quadruped, of which the number that can
be supported in any country has long ago arrived at its full average.
If its natural power of increase be allowed to act, it can succeed in
increasing (the country not undergoing any change in conditions) only
by its varying descendants seizing on places at present occupied by
other animals: some of them, for instance, being enabled to feed on new
kinds of prey, either dead or alive; some inhabiting new stations,
climbing trees, frequenting water, and some perhaps becoming less
carnivorous. The more diversified in habits and structure the
descendants of our carnivorous animals become, the more places they
will be enabled to occupy. What applies to one animal will apply
throughout all time to all animals—that is, if they vary—for otherwise
natural selection can effect nothing. So it will be with plants. It has
been experimentally proved, that if a plot of ground be sown with one
species of grass, and a similar plot be sown with several distinct
genera of grasses, a greater number of plants and a greater weight of
dry herbage can be raised in the latter than in the former case. The
same has been found to hold good when one variety and several mixed
varieties of wheat have been sown on equal spaces of ground. Hence, if
any one species of grass were to go on varying, and the varieties were
continually selected which differed from each other in the same manner,
though in a very slight degree, as do the distinct species and genera
of grasses, a greater number of individual plants of this species,
including its modified descendants, would succeed in living on the same
piece of ground. And we know that each species and each variety of
grass is annually sowing almost countless seeds; and is thus striving,
as it may be said, to the utmost to increase in number. Consequently,
in the course of many thousand generations, the most distinct varieties
of any one species of grass would have the best chance of succeeding
and of increasing in numbers, and thus of supplanting the less distinct
varieties; and varieties, when rendered very distinct from each other,
take the rank of species.

The truth of the principle that the greatest amount of life can be
supported by great diversification of structure, is seen under many
natural circumstances. In an extremely small area, especially if freely
open to immigration, and where the contest between individual and
individual must be very severe, we always find great diversity in its
inhabitants. For instance, I found that a piece of turf, three feet by
four in size, which had been exposed for many years to exactly the same
conditions, supported twenty species of plants, and these belonged to
eighteen genera and to eight orders, which shows how much these plants
differed from each other. So it is with the plants and insects on small
and uniform islets: also in small ponds of fresh water. Farmers find
that they can raise more food by a rotation of plants belonging to the
most different orders: nature follows what may be called a simultaneous
rotation. Most of the animals and plants which live close round any
small piece of ground, could live on it (supposing its nature not to be
in any way peculiar), and may be said to be striving to the utmost to
live there; but, it is seen, that where they come into the closest
competition, the advantages of diversification of structure, with the
accompanying differences of habit and constitution, determine that the
inhabitants, which thus jostle each other most closely, shall, as a
general rule, belong to what we call different genera and orders.

The same principle is seen in the naturalisation of plants through
man’s agency in foreign lands. It might have been expected that the
plants which would succeed in becoming naturalised in any land would
generally have been closely allied to the indigenes; for these are
commonly looked at as specially created and adapted for their own
country. It might also, perhaps, have been expected that naturalised
plants would have belonged to a few groups more especially adapted to
certain stations in their new homes. But the case is very different;
and Alph. de Candolle has well remarked, in his great and admirable
work, that floras gain by naturalisation, proportionally with the
number of the native genera and species, far more in new genera than in
new species. To give a single instance: in the last edition of Dr. Asa
Gray’s “Manual of the Flora of the Northern United States,” 260
naturalised plants are enumerated, and these belong to 162 genera. We
thus see that these naturalised plants are of a highly diversified
nature. They differ, moreover, to a large extent, from the indigenes,
for out of the 162 naturalised genera, no less than 100 genera are not
there indigenous, and thus a large proportional addition is made to the
genera now living in the United States.

By considering the nature of the plants or animals which have in any
country struggled successfully with the indigenes, and have there
become naturalised, we may gain some crude idea in what manner some of
the natives would have had to be modified in order to gain an advantage
over their compatriots; and we may at least infer that diversification
of structure, amounting to new generic differences, would be profitable
to them.

The advantage of diversification of structure in the inhabitants of the
same region is, in fact, the same as that of the physiological division
of labour in the organs of the same individual body—a subject so well
elucidated by Milne Edwards. No physiologist doubts that a stomach by
being adapted to digest vegetable matter alone, or flesh alone, draws
most nutriment from these substances. So in the general economy of any
land, the more widely and perfectly the animals and plants are
diversified for different habits of life, so will a greater number of
individuals be capable of there supporting themselves. A set of
animals, with their organisation but little diversified, could hardly
compete with a set more perfectly diversified in structure. It may be
doubted, for instance, whether the Australian marsupials, which are
divided into groups differing but little from each other, and feebly
representing, as Mr. Waterhouse and others have remarked, our
carnivorous, ruminant, and rodent mammals, could successfully compete
with these well-developed orders. In the Australian mammals, we see the
process of diversification in an early and incomplete stage of
development.

_The Probable Effects of the Action of Natural Selection through
Divergence of Character and Extinction, on the Descendants of a Common
Ancestor._

After the foregoing discussion, which has been much compressed, we may
assume that the modified descendants of any one species will succeed so
much the better as they become more diversified in structure, and are
thus enabled to encroach on places occupied by other beings. Now let us
see how this principle of benefit being derived from divergence of
character, combined with the principles of natural selection and of
extinction, tends to act.

The accompanying diagram will aid us in understanding this rather
perplexing subject. Let A to L represent the species of a genus large
in its own country; these species are supposed to resemble each other
in unequal degrees, as is so generally the case in nature, and as is
represented in the diagram by the letters standing at unequal
distances. I have said a large genus, because as we saw in the second
chapter, on an average more species vary in large genera than in small
genera; and the varying species of the large genera present a greater
number of varieties. We have, also, seen that the species, which are
the commonest and most widely-diffused, vary more than do the rare and
restricted species. Let (A) be a common, widely-diffused, and varying
species, belonging to a genus large in its own country. The branching
and diverging dotted lines of unequal lengths proceeding from (A), may
represent its varying offspring. The variations are supposed to be
extremely slight, but of the most diversified nature; they are not
supposed all to appear simultaneously, but often after long intervals
of time; nor are they all supposed to endure for equal periods. Only
those variations which are in some way profitable will be preserved or
naturally selected. And here the importance of the principle of benefit
derived from divergence of character comes in; for this will generally
lead to the most different or divergent variations (represented by the
outer dotted lines) being preserved and accumulated by natural
selection. When a dotted line reaches one of the horizontal lines, and
is there marked by a small numbered letter, a sufficient amount of
variation is supposed to have been accumulated to form it into a fairly
well-marked variety, such as would be thought worthy of record in a
systematic work.

[Illustration]

The intervals between the horizontal lines in the diagram, may
represent each a thousand or more generations. After a thousand
generations, species (A) is supposed to have produced two fairly
well-marked varieties, namely _a_1 and _m_1. These two varieties will
generally still be exposed to the same conditions which made their
parents variable, and the tendency to variability is in itself
hereditary; consequently they will likewise tend to vary, and commonly
in nearly the same manner as did their parents. Moreover, these two
varieties, being only slightly modified forms, will tend to inherit
those advantages which made their parent (A) more numerous than most of
the other inhabitants of the same country; they will also partake of
those more general advantages which made the genus to which the
parent-species belonged, a large genus in its own country. And all
these circumstances are favourable to the production of new varieties.

If, then, these two varieties be variable, the most divergent of their
variations will generally be preserved during the next thousand
generations. And after this interval, variety a1 is supposed in the
diagram to have produced variety _a_2, which will, owing to the
principle of divergence, differ more from (A) than did variety _a_1.
Variety _m_1 is supposed to have produced two varieties, namely _m_2
and _s_2, differing from each other, and more considerably from their
common parent (A). We may continue the process by similar steps for any
length of time; some of the varieties, after each thousand generations,
producing only a single variety, but in a more and more modified
condition, some producing two or three varieties, and some failing to
produce any. Thus the varieties or modified descendants of the common
parent (A), will generally go on increasing in number and diverging in
character. In the diagram the process is represented up to the
ten-thousandth generation, and under a condensed and simplified form up
to the fourteen-thousandth generation.

But I must here remark that I do not suppose that the process ever goes
on so regularly as is represented in the diagram, though in itself made
somewhat irregular, nor that it goes on continuously; it is far more
probable that each form remains for long periods unaltered, and then
again undergoes modification. Nor do I suppose that the most divergent
varieties are invariably preserved: a medium form may often long
endure, and may or may not produce more than one modified descendant;
for natural selection will always act according to the nature of the
places which are either unoccupied or not perfectly occupied by other
beings; and this will depend on infinitely complex relations. But as a
general rule, the more diversified in structure the descendants from
any one species can be rendered, the more places they will be enabled
to seize on, and the more their modified progeny will increase. In our
diagram the line of succession is broken at regular intervals by small
numbered letters marking the successive forms which have become
sufficiently distinct to be recorded as varieties. But these breaks are
imaginary, and might have been inserted anywhere, after intervals long
enough to allow the accumulation of a considerable amount of divergent
variation.

As all the modified descendants from a common and widely-diffused
species, belonging to a large genus, will tend to partake of the same
advantages which made their parent successful in life, they will
generally go on multiplying in number as well as diverging in
character: this is represented in the diagram by the several divergent
branches proceeding from (A). The modified offspring from the later and
more highly improved branches in the lines of descent, will, it is
probable, often take the place of, and so destroy, the earlier and less
improved branches: this is represented in the diagram by some of the
lower branches not reaching to the upper horizontal lines. In some
cases no doubt the process of modification will be confined to a single
line of descent, and the number of modified descendants will not be
increased; although the amount of divergent modification may have been
augmented. This case would be represented in the diagram, if all the
lines proceeding from (A) were removed, excepting that from _a_1 to
_a_10. In the same way the English racehorse and English pointer have
apparently both gone on slowly diverging in character from their
original stocks, without either having given off any fresh branches or
races.

After ten thousand generations, species (A) is supposed to have
produced three forms, _a_10, _f_10, and _m_10, which, from having
diverged in character during the successive generations, will have come
to differ largely, but perhaps unequally, from each other and from
their common parent. If we suppose the amount of change between each
horizontal line in our diagram to be excessively small, these three
forms may still be only well-marked varieties; but we have only to
suppose the steps in the process of modification to be more numerous or
greater in amount, to convert these three forms into doubtful or at
least into well-defined species: thus the diagram illustrates the steps
by which the small differences distinguishing varieties are increased
into the larger differences distinguishing species. By continuing the
same process for a greater number of generations (as shown in the
diagram in a condensed and simplified manner), we get eight species,
marked by the letters between _a_14 and _m_14, all descended from (A).
Thus, as I believe, species are multiplied and genera are formed.

In a large genus it is probable that more than one species would vary.
In the diagram I have assumed that a second species (I) has produced,
by analogous steps, after ten thousand generations, either two
well-marked varieties (_w_10 and _z_10) or two species, according to
the amount of change supposed to be represented between the horizontal
lines. After fourteen thousand generations, six new species, marked by
the letters _n_14 to _z_14, are supposed to have been produced. In any
genus, the species which are already very different in character from
each other, will generally tend to produce the greatest number of
modified descendants; for these will have the best chance of seizing on
new and widely different places in the polity of nature: hence in the
diagram I have chosen the extreme species (A), and the nearly extreme
species (I), as those which have largely varied, and have given rise to
new varieties and species. The other nine species (marked by capital
letters) of our original genus, may for long but unequal periods
continue to transmit unaltered descendants; and this is shown in the
diagram by the dotted lines unequally prolonged upwards.

But during the process of modification, represented in the diagram,
another of our principles, namely that of extinction, will have played
an important part. As in each fully stocked country natural selection
necessarily acts by the selected form having some advantage in the
struggle for life over other forms, there will be a constant tendency
in the improved descendants of any one species to supplant and
exterminate in each stage of descent their predecessors and their
original progenitor. For it should be remembered that the competition
will generally be most severe between those forms which are most nearly
related to each other in habits, constitution and structure. Hence all
the intermediate forms between the earlier and later states, that is
between the less and more improved states of a the same species, as
well as the original parent-species itself, will generally tend to
become extinct. So it probably will be with many whole collateral lines
of descent, which will be conquered by later and improved lines. If,
however, the modified offspring of a species get into some distinct
country, or become quickly adapted to some quite new station, in which
offspring and progenitor do not come into competition, both may
continue to exist.

If, then, our diagram be assumed to represent a considerable amount of
modification, species (A) and all the earlier varieties will have
become extinct, being replaced by eight new species (_a_14 to _m_14);
and species (I) will be replaced by six (_n_14 to _z_14) new species.

But we may go further than this. The original species of our genus were
supposed to resemble each other in unequal degrees, as is so generally
the case in nature; species (A) being more nearly related to B, C, and
D than to the other species; and species (I) more to G, H, K, L, than
to the others. These two species (A and I), were also supposed to be
very common and widely diffused species, so that they must originally
have had some advantage over most of the other species of the genus.
Their modified descendants, fourteen in number at the
fourteen-thousandth generation, will probably have inherited some of
the same advantages: they have also been modified and improved in a
diversified manner at each stage of descent, so as to have become
adapted to many related places in the natural economy of their country.
It seems, therefore, extremely probable that they will have taken the
places of, and thus exterminated, not only their parents (A) and (I),
but likewise some of the original species which were most nearly
related to their parents. Hence very few of the original species will
have transmitted offspring to the fourteen-thousandth generation. We
may suppose that only one (F) of the two species (E and F) which were
least closely related to the other nine original species, has
transmitted descendants to this late stage of descent.

The new species in our diagram, descended from the original eleven
species, will now be fifteen in number. Owing to the divergent tendency
of natural selection, the extreme amount of difference in character
between species _a_14 and _z_14 will be much greater than that between
the most distinct of the original eleven species. The new species,
moreover, will be allied to each other in a widely different manner. Of
the eight descendants from (A) the three marked _a_14, _q_14, _p_14,
will be nearly related from having recently branched off from _a_10;
_b_14 and _f_14, from having diverged at an earlier period from _a_5,
will be in some degree distinct from the three first-named species; and
lastly, _o_14, _e_14, and _m_14, will be nearly related one to the
other, but, from having diverged at the first commencement of the
process of modification, will be widely different from the other five
species, and may constitute a sub-genus or a distinct genus.

The six descendants from (I) will form two sub-genera or genera. But as
the original species (I) differed largely from (A), standing nearly at
the extreme end of the original genus, the six descendants from (I)
will, owing to inheritance alone, differ considerably from the eight
descendants from (A); the two groups, moreover, are supposed to have
gone on diverging in different directions. The intermediate species,
also (and this is a very important consideration), which connected the
original species (A) and (I), have all become, except (F), extinct, and
have left no descendants. Hence the six new species descended from (I),
and the eight descendants from (A), will have to be ranked as very
distinct genera, or even as distinct sub-families.

Thus it is, as I believe, that two or more genera are produced by
descent with modification, from two or more species of the same genus.
And the two or more parent-species are supposed to be descended from
some one species of an earlier genus. In our diagram this is indicated
by the broken lines beneath the capital letters, converging in
sub-branches downwards towards a single point; this point represents a
species, the supposed progenitor of our several new sub-genera and
genera.

It is worth while to reflect for a moment on the character of the new
species F14, which is supposed not to have diverged much in character,
but to have retained the form of (F), either unaltered or altered only
in a slight degree. In this case its affinities to the other fourteen
new species will be of a curious and circuitous nature. Being descended
from a form that stood between the parent-species (A) and (I), now
supposed to be extinct and unknown, it will be in some degree
intermediate in character between the two groups descended from these
two species. But as these two groups have gone on diverging in
character from the type of their parents, the new species (F14) will
not be directly intermediate between them, but rather between types of
the two groups; and every naturalist will be able to call such cases
before his mind.

In the diagram each horizontal line has hitherto been supposed to
represent a thousand generations, but each may represent a million or
more generations; it may also represent a section of the successive
strata of the earth’s crust including extinct remains. We shall, when
we come to our chapter on geology, have to refer again to this subject,
and I think we shall then see that the diagram throws light on the
affinities of extinct beings, which, though generally belonging to the
same orders, families, or genera, with those now living, yet are often,
in some degree, intermediate in character between existing groups; and
we can understand this fact, for the extinct species lived at various
remote epochs when the branching lines of descent had diverged less.

I see no reason to limit the process of modification, as now explained,
to the formation of genera alone. If, in the diagram, we suppose the
amount of change represented by each successive group of diverging
dotted lines to be great, the forms marked _a_14 to _p_14, those marked
_b_14 and _f_14, and those marked _o_14 to _m_14, will form three very
distinct genera. We shall also have two very distinct genera descended
from (I), differing widely from the descendants of (A). These two
groups of genera will thus form two distinct families, or orders,
according to the amount of divergent modification supposed to be
represented in the diagram. And the two new families, or orders, are
descended from two species of the original genus; and these are
supposed to be descended from some still more ancient and unknown form.

We have seen that in each country it is the species belonging to the
larger genera which oftenest present varieties or incipient species.
This, indeed, might have been expected; for as natural selection acts
through one form having some advantage over other forms in the struggle
for existence, it will chiefly act on those which already have some
advantage; and the largeness of any group shows that its species have
inherited from a common ancestor some advantage in common. Hence, the
struggle for the production of new and modified descendants will mainly
lie between the larger groups, which are all trying to increase in
number. One large group will slowly conquer another large group, reduce
its number, and thus lessen its chance of further variation and
improvement. Within the same large group, the later and more highly
perfected sub-groups, from branching out and seizing on many new places
in the polity of nature, will constantly tend to supplant and destroy
the earlier and less improved sub-groups. Small and broken groups and
sub-groups will finally disappear. Looking to the future, we can
predict that the groups of organic beings which are now large and
triumphant, and which are least broken up, that is, which have as yet
suffered least extinction, will, for a long period, continue to
increase. But which groups will ultimately prevail, no man can predict;
for we know that many groups, formerly most extensively developed, have
now become extinct. Looking still more remotely to the future, we may
predict that, owing to the continued and steady increase of the larger
groups, a multitude of smaller groups will become utterly extinct, and
leave no modified descendants; and consequently that, of the species
living at any one period, extremely few will transmit descendants to a
remote futurity. I shall have to return to this subject in the chapter
on classification, but I may add that as, according to this view,
extremely few of the more ancient species have transmitted descendants
to the present day, and, as all the descendants of the same species
form a class, we can understand how it is that there exist so few
classes in each main division of the animal and vegetable kingdoms.
Although few of the most ancient species have left modified
descendants, yet, at remote geological periods, the earth may have been
almost as well peopled with species of many genera, families, orders
and classes, as at the present day.

_On the Degree to which Organisation tends to advance._

Natural selection acts exclusively by the preservation and accumulation
of variations, which are beneficial under the organic and inorganic
conditions to which each creature is exposed at all periods of life.
The ultimate result is that each creature tends to become more and more
improved in relation to its conditions. This improvement inevitably
leads to the gradual advancement of the organisation of the greater
number of living beings throughout the world. But here we enter on a
very intricate subject, for naturalists have not defined to each
other’s satisfaction what is meant by an advance in organisation. Among
the vertebrata the degree of intellect and an approach in structure to
man clearly come into play. It might be thought that the amount of
change which the various parts and organs pass through in their
development from embryo to maturity would suffice as a standard of
comparison; but there are cases, as with certain parasitic crustaceans,
in which several parts of the structure become less perfect, so that
the mature animal cannot be called higher than its larva. Von Baer’s
standard seems the most widely applicable and the best, namely, the
amount of differentiation of the parts of the same organic being, in
the adult state, as I should be inclined to add, and their
specialisation for different functions; or, as Milne Edwards would
express it, the completeness of the division of physiological labour.
But we shall see how obscure this subject is if we look, for instance,
to fishes, among which some naturalists rank those as highest which,
like the sharks, approach nearest to amphibians; while other
naturalists rank the common bony or teleostean fishes as the highest,
inasmuch as they are most strictly fish-like, and differ most from the
other vertebrate classes. We see still more plainly the obscurity of
the subject by turning to plants, among which the standard of intellect
is of course quite excluded; and here some botanists rank those plants
as highest which have every organ, as sepals, petals, stamens and
pistils, fully developed in each flower; whereas other botanists,
probably with more truth, look at the plants which have their several
organs much modified and reduced in number as the highest.

If we take as the standard of high organisation, the amount of
differentiation and specialisation of the several organs in each being
when adult (and this will include the advancement of the brain for
intellectual purposes), natural selection clearly leads towards this
standard: for all physiologists admit that the specialisation of
organs, inasmuch as in this state they perform their functions better,
is an advantage to each being; and hence the accumulation of variations
tending towards specialisation is within the scope of natural
selection. On the other hand, we can see, bearing in mind that all
organic beings are striving to increase at a high ratio and to seize on
every unoccupied or less well occupied place in the economy of nature,
that it is quite possible for natural selection gradually to fit a
being to a situation in which several organs would be superfluous or
useless: in such cases there would be retrogression in the scale of
organisation. Whether organisation on the whole has actually advanced
from the remotest geological periods to the present day will be more
conveniently discussed in our chapter on Geological Succession.

But it may be objected that if all organic beings thus tend to rise in
the scale, how is it that throughout the world a multitude of the
lowest forms still exist; and how is it that in each great class some
forms are far more highly developed than others? Why have not the more
highly developed forms every where supplanted and exterminated the
lower? Lamarck, who believed in an innate and inevitable tendency
towards perfection in all organic beings, seems to have felt this
difficulty so strongly that he was led to suppose that new and simple
forms are continually being produced by spontaneous generation. Science
has not as yet proved the truth of this belief, whatever the future may
reveal. On our theory the continued existence of lowly organisms offers
no difficulty; for natural selection, or the survival of the fittest,
does not necessarily include progressive development—it only takes
advantage of such variations as arise and are beneficial to each
creature under its complex relations of life. And it may be asked what
advantage, as far as we can see, would it be to an infusorian
animalcule—to an intestinal worm—or even to an earth-worm, to be highly
organised. If it were no advantage, these forms would be left, by
natural selection, unimproved or but little improved, and might remain
for indefinite ages in their present lowly condition. And geology tells
us that some of the lowest forms, as the infusoria and rhizopods, have
remained for an enormous period in nearly their present state. But to
suppose that most of the many now existing low forms have not in the
least advanced since the first dawn of life would be extremely rash;
for every naturalist who has dissected some of the beings now ranked as
very low in the scale, must have been struck with their really wondrous
and beautiful organisation.

Nearly the same remarks are applicable, if we look to the different
grades of organisation within the same great group; for instance, in
the vertebrata, to the co-existence of mammals and fish—among mammalia,
to the co-existence of man and the ornithorhynchus—among fishes, to the
co-existence of the shark and the lancelet (Amphioxus), which latter
fish in the extreme simplicity of its structure approaches the
invertebrate classes. But mammals and fish hardly come into competition
with each other; the advancement of the whole class of mammals, or of
certain members in this class, to the highest grade would not lead to
their taking the place of fishes. Physiologists believe that the brain
must be bathed by warm blood to be highly active, and this requires
aërial respiration; so that warm-blooded mammals when inhabiting the
water lie under a disadvantage in having to come continually to the
surface to breathe. With fishes, members of the shark family would not
tend to supplant the lancelet; for the lancelet, as I hear from Fritz
Müller, has as sole companion and competitor on the barren sandy shore
of South Brazil, an anomalous annelid. The three lowest orders of
mammals, namely, marsupials, edentata, and rodents, co-exist in South
America in the same region with numerous monkeys, and probably
interfere little with each other. Although organisation, on the whole,
may have advanced and be still advancing throughout the world, yet the
scale will always present many degrees of perfection; for the high
advancement of certain whole classes, or of certain members of each
class, does not at all necessarily lead to the extinction of those
groups with which they do not enter into close competition. In some
cases, as we shall hereafter see, lowly organised forms appear to have
been preserved to the present day, from inhabiting confined or peculiar
stations, where they have been subjected to less severe competition,
and where their scanty numbers have retarded the chance of favourable
variations arising.

Finally, I believe that many lowly organised forms now exist throughout
the world, from various causes. In some cases variations or individual
differences of a favourable nature may never have arisen for natural
selection to act on and accumulate. In no case, probably, has time
sufficed for the utmost possible amount of development. In some few
cases there has been what we must call retrogression or organisation.
But the main cause lies in the fact that under very simple conditions
of life a high organisation would be of no service—possibly would be of
actual disservice, as being of a more delicate nature, and more liable
to be put out of order and injured.

Looking to the first dawn of life, when all organic beings, as we may
believe, presented the simplest structure, how, it has been asked,
could the first step in the advancement or differentiation of parts
have arisen? Mr. Herbert Spencer would probably answer that, as soon as
simple unicellular organisms came by growth or division to be
compounded of several cells, or became attached to any supporting
surface, his law “that homologous units of any order become
differentiated in proportion as their relations to incident forces
become different” would come into action. But as we have no facts to
guide us, speculation on the subject is almost useless. It is, however,
an error to suppose that there would be no struggle for existence, and,
consequently, no natural selection, until many forms had been produced:
variations in a single species inhabiting an isolated station might be
beneficial, and thus the whole mass of individuals might be modified,
or two distinct forms might arise. But, as I remarked towards the close
of the introduction, no one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as
yet unexplained on the origin of species, if we make due allowance for
our profound ignorance on the mutual relations of the inhabitants of
the world at the present time, and still more so during past ages.

_Convergence of Character._

Mr. H.C. Watson thinks that I have overrated the importance of
divergence of character (in which, however, he apparently believes),
and that convergence, as it may be called, has likewise played a part.
If two species belonging to two distinct though allied genera, had both
produced a large number of new and divergent forms, it is conceivable
that these might approach each other so closely that they would have
all to be classed under the same genus; and thus the descendants of two
distinct genera would converge into one. But it would in most cases be
extremely rash to attribute to convergence a close and general
similarity of structure in the modified descendants of widely distinct
forms. The shape of a crystal is determined solely by the molecular
forces, and it is not surprising that dissimilar substances should
sometimes assume the same form; but with organic beings we should bear
in mind that the form of each depends on an infinitude of complex
relations, namely on the variations which have arisen, these being due
to causes far too intricate to be followed out—on the nature of the
variations which have been preserved or selected, and this depends on
the surrounding physical conditions, and in a still higher degree on
the surrounding organisms with which each being has come into
competition—and lastly, on inheritance (in itself a fluctuating
element) from innumerable progenitors, all of which have had their
forms determined through equally complex relations. It is incredible
that the descendants of two organisms, which had originally differed in
a marked manner, should ever afterwards converge so closely as to lead
to a near approach to identity throughout their whole organisation. If
this had occurred, we should meet with the same form, independently of
genetic connection, recurring in widely separated geological
formations; and the balance of evidence is opposed to any such an
admission.

Mr. Watson has also objected that the continued action of natural
selection, together with divergence of character, would tend to make an
indefinite number of specific forms. As far as mere inorganic
conditions are concerned, it seems probable that a sufficient number of
species would soon become adapted to all considerable diversities of
heat, moisture, &c.; but I fully admit that the mutual relations of
organic beings are more important; and as the number of species in any
country goes on increasing, the organic conditions of life must become
more and more complex. Consequently there seems at first no limit to
the amount of profitable diversification of structure, and therefore no
limit to the number of species which might be produced. We do not know
that even the most prolific area is fully stocked with specific forms:
at the Cape of Good Hope and in Australia, which support such an
astonishing number of species, many European plants have become
naturalised. But geology shows us, that from an early part of the
tertiary period the number of species of shells, and that from the
middle part of this same period, the number of mammals has not greatly
or at all increased. What then checks an indefinite increase in the
number of species? The amount of life (I do not mean the number of
specific forms) supported on an area must have a limit, depending so
largely as it does on physical conditions; therefore, if an area be
inhabited by very many species, each or nearly each species will be
represented by few individuals; and such species will be liable to
extermination from accidental fluctuations in the nature of the seasons
or in the number of their enemies. The process of extermination in such
cases would be rapid, whereas the production of new species must always
be slow. Imagine the extreme case of as many species as individuals in
England, and the first severe winter or very dry summer would
exterminate thousands on thousands of species. Rare species, and each
species will become rare if the number of species in any country
becomes indefinitely increased, will, on the principal often explained,
present within a given period few favourable variations; consequently,
the process of giving birth to new specific forms would thus be
retarded. When any species becomes very rare, close interbreeding will
help to exterminate it; authors have thought that this comes into play
in accounting for the deterioration of the aurochs in Lithuania, of red
deer in Scotland and of bears in Norway, &c. Lastly, and this I am
inclined to think is the most important element, a dominant species,
which has already beaten many competitors in its own home, will tend to
spread and supplant many others. Alph. de Candolle has shown that those
species which spread widely tend generally to spread _very_ widely,
consequently they will tend to supplant and exterminate several species
in several areas, and thus check the inordinate increase of specific
forms throughout the world. Dr. Hooker has recently shown that in the
southeast corner of Australia, where, apparently, there are many
invaders from different quarters of the globe, the endemic Australian
species have been greatly reduced in number. How much weight to
attribute to these several considerations I will not pretend to say;
but conjointly they must limit in each country the tendency to an
indefinite augmentation of specific forms.

_Summary of Chapter._

If under changing conditions of life organic beings present individual
differences in almost every part of their structure, and this cannot be
disputed; if there be, owing to their geometrical rate of increase, a
severe struggle for life at some age, season or year, and this
certainly cannot be disputed; then, considering the infinite complexity
of the relations of all organic beings to each other and to their
conditions of life, causing an infinite diversity in structure,
constitution, and habits, to be advantageous to them, it would be a
most extraordinary fact if no variations had ever occurred useful to
each being’s own welfare, in the same manner as so many variations have
occurred useful to man. But if variations useful to any organic being
ever do occur, assuredly individuals thus characterised will have the
best chance of being preserved in the struggle for life; and from the
strong principle of inheritance, these will tend to produce offspring
similarly characterised. This principle of preservation, or the
survival of the fittest, I have called Natural Selection. It leads to
the improvement of each creature in relation to its organic and
inorganic conditions of life; and consequently, in most cases, to what
must be regarded as an advance in organisation. Nevertheless, low and
simple forms will long endure if well fitted for their simple
conditions of life.

Natural selection, on the principle of qualities being inherited at
corresponding ages, can modify the egg, seed, or young as easily as the
adult. Among many animals sexual selection will have given its aid to
ordinary selection by assuring to the most vigorous and best adapted
males the greatest number of offspring. Sexual selection will also give
characters useful to the males alone in their struggles or rivalry with
other males; and these characters will be transmitted to one sex or to
both sexes, according to the form of inheritance which prevails.

Whether natural selection has really thus acted in adapting the various
forms of life to their several conditions and stations, must be judged
by the general tenour and balance of evidence given in the following
chapters. But we have already seen how it entails extinction; and how
largely extinction has acted in the world’s history, geology plainly
declares. Natural selection, also, leads to divergence of character;
for the more organic beings diverge in structure, habits and
constitution, by so much the more can a large number be supported on
the area, of which we see proof by looking to the inhabitants of any
small spot, and to the productions naturalised in foreign lands.
Therefore, during the modification of the descendants of any one
species, and during the incessant struggle of all species to increase
in numbers, the more diversified the descendants become, the better
will be their chance of success in the battle for life. Thus the small
differences distinguishing varieties of the same species, steadily tend
to increase, till they equal the greater differences between species of
the same genus, or even of distinct genera.

We have seen that it is the common, the widely diffused, and widely
ranging species, belonging to the larger genera within each class,
which vary most; and these tend to transmit to their modified offspring
that superiority which now makes them dominant in their own countries.
Natural selection, as has just been remarked, leads to divergence of
character and to much extinction of the less improved and intermediate
forms of life. On these principles, the nature of the affinities, and
the generally well defined distinctions between the innumerable organic
beings in each class throughout the world, may be explained. It is a
truly wonderful fact—the wonder of which we are apt to overlook from
familiarity—that all animals and all plants throughout all time and
space should be related to each other in groups, subordinate to groups,
in the manner which we everywhere behold—namely, varieties of the same
species most closely related, species of the same genus less closely
and unequally related, forming sections and sub-genera, species of
distinct genera much less closely related, and genera related in
different degrees, forming sub-families, families, orders, sub-classes,
and classes. The several subordinate groups in any class cannot be
ranked in a single file, but seem clustered round points, and these
round other points, and so on in almost endless cycles. If species had
been independently created, no explanation would have been possible of
this kind of classification; but it is explained through inheritance
and the complex action of natural selection, entailing extinction and
divergence of character, as we have seen illustrated in the diagram.

The affinities of all the beings of the same class have sometimes been
represented by a great tree. I believe this simile largely speaks the
truth. The green and budding twigs may represent existing species; and
those produced during former years may represent the long succession of
extinct species. At each period of growth all the growing twigs have
tried to branch out on all sides, and to overtop and kill the
surrounding twigs and branches, in the same manner as species and
groups of species have at all times overmastered other species in the
great battle for life. The limbs divided into great branches, and these
into lesser and lesser branches, were themselves once, when the tree
was young, budding twigs; and this connexion of the former and present
buds by ramifying branches may well represent the classification of all
extinct and living species in groups subordinate to groups. Of the many
twigs which flourished when the tree was a mere bush, only two or
three, now grown into great branches, yet survive and bear the other
branches; so with the species which lived during long-past geological
periods, very few have left living and modified descendants. From the
first growth of the tree, many a limb and branch has decayed and
dropped off; and these fallen branches of various sizes may represent
those whole orders, families, and genera which have now no living
representatives, and which are known to us only in a fossil state. As
we here and there see a thin, straggling branch springing from a fork
low down in a tree, and which by some chance has been favoured and is
still alive on its summit, so we occasionally see an animal like the
Ornithorhynchus or Lepidosiren, which in some small degree connects by
its affinities two large branches of life, and which has apparently
been saved from fatal competition by having inhabited a protected
station. As buds give rise by growth to fresh buds, and these, if
vigorous, branch out and overtop on all sides many a feebler branch, so
by generation I believe it has been with the great Tree of Life, which
fills with its dead and broken branches the crust of the earth, and
covers the surface with its ever-branching and beautiful ramifications.

CHAPTER V.
LAWS OF VARIATION.

Effects of changed conditions—Use and disuse, combined with natural
selection; organs of flight and of vision—Acclimatisation—Correlated
variation—Compensation and economy of growth—False
correlations—Multiple, rudimentary, and lowly organised structures
variable—Parts developed in an unusual manner are highly variable:
specific characters more variable than generic: secondary sexual
characters variable—Species of the same genus vary in an analogous
manner—Reversions to long-lost characters—Summary.

I have hitherto sometimes spoken as if the variations—so common and
multiform with organic beings under domestication, and in a lesser
degree with those under nature—were due to chance. This, of course is a
wholly incorrect expression, but it serves to acknowledge plainly our
ignorance of the cause of each particular variation. Some authors
believe it to be as much the function of the reproductive system to
produce individual differences, or slight deviations of structure, as
to make the child like its parents. But the fact of variations and
monstrosities occurring much more frequently under domestication than
under nature, and the greater variability of species having wide ranges
than of those with restricted ranges, lead to the conclusion that
variability is generally related to the conditions of life to which
each species has been exposed during several successive generations. In
the first chapter I attempted to show that changed conditions act in
two ways, directly on the whole organisation or on certain parts alone,
and indirectly through the reproductive system. In all cases there are
two factors, the nature of the organism, which is much the most
important of the two, and the nature of the conditions. The direct
action of changed conditions leads to definite or indefinite results.
In the latter case the organisation seems to become plastic, and we
have much fluctuating variability. In the former case the nature of the
organism is such that it yields readily, when subjected to certain
conditions, and all, or nearly all, the individuals become modified in
the same way.

It is very difficult to decide how far changed conditions, such as of
climate, food, &c., have acted in a definite manner. There is reason to
believe that in the course of time the effects have been greater than
can be proved by clear evidence. But we may safely conclude that the
innumerable complex co-adaptations of structure, which we see
throughout nature between various organic beings, cannot be attributed
simply to such action. In the following cases the conditions seem to
have produced some slight definite effect: E. Forbes asserts that
shells at their southern limit, and when living in shallow water, are
more brightly coloured than those of the same species from further
north or from a greater depth; but this certainly does not always hold
good. Mr. Gould believes that birds of the same species are more
brightly coloured under a clear atmosphere, than when living near the
coast or on islands; and Wollaston is convinced that residence near the
sea affects the colours of insects. Moquin-Tandon gives a list of
plants which, when growing near the sea-shore, have their leaves in
some degree fleshy, though not elsewhere fleshy. These slightly varying
organisms are interesting in as far as they present characters
analogous to those possessed by the species which are confined to
similar conditions.

When a variation is of the slightest use to any being, we cannot tell
how much to attribute to the accumulative action of natural selection,
and how much to the definite action of the conditions of life. Thus, it
is well known to furriers that animals of the same species have thicker
and better fur the further north they live; but who can tell how much
of this difference may be due to the warmest-clad individuals having
been favoured and preserved during many generations, and how much to
the action of the severe climate? For it would appear that climate has
some direct action on the hair of our domestic quadrupeds.

Instances could be given of similar varieties being produced from the
same species under external conditions of life as different as can well
be conceived; and, on the other hand, of dissimilar varieties being
produced under apparently the same external conditions. Again,
innumerable instances are known to every naturalist, of species keeping
true, or not varying at all, although living under the most opposite
climates. Such considerations as these incline me to lay less weight on
the direct action of the surrounding conditions, than on a tendency to
vary, due to causes of which we are quite ignorant.

In one sense the conditions of life may be said, not only to cause
variability, either directly or indirectly, but likewise to include
natural selection, for the conditions determine whether this or that
variety shall survive. But when man is the selecting agent, we clearly
see that the two elements of change are distinct; variability is in
some manner excited, but it is the will of man which accumulates the
variations in certain direction; and it is this latter agency which
answers to the survival of the fittest under nature.

_Effects of the increased Use and Disuse of Parts, as controlled by
Natural Selection._

From the facts alluded to in the first chapter, I think there can be no
doubt that use in our domestic animals has strengthened and enlarged
certain parts, and disuse diminished them; and that such modifications
are inherited. Under free nature we have no standard of comparison by
which to judge of the effects of long-continued use or disuse, for we
know not the parent-forms; but many animals possess structures which
can be best explained by the effects of disuse. As Professor Owen has
remarked, there is no greater anomaly in nature than a bird that cannot
fly; yet there are several in this state. The logger-headed duck of
South America can only flap along the surface of the water, and has its
wings in nearly the same condition as the domestic Aylesbury duck: it
is a remarkable fact that the young birds, according to Mr. Cunningham,
can fly, while the adults have lost this power. As the larger
ground-feeding birds seldom take flight except to escape danger, it is
probable that the nearly wingless condition of several birds, now
inhabiting or which lately inhabited several oceanic islands, tenanted
by no beasts of prey, has been caused by disuse. The ostrich indeed
inhabits continents, and is exposed to danger from which it cannot
escape by flight, but it can defend itself, by kicking its enemies, as
efficiently as many quadrupeds. We may believe that the progenitor of
the ostrich genus had habits like those of the bustard, and that, as
the size and weight of its body were increased during successive
generations, its legs were used more and its wings less, until they
became incapable of flight.

Kirby has remarked (and I have observed the same fact) that the
anterior tarsi, or feet, of many male dung-feeding beetles are often
broken off; he examined seventeen specimens in his own collection, and
not one had even a relic left. In the Onites apelles the tarsi are so
habitually lost that the insect has been described as not having them.
In some other genera they are present, but in a rudimentary condition.
In the Ateuchus or sacred beetle of the Egyptians, they are totally
deficient. The evidence that accidental mutilations can be inherited is
at present not decisive; but the remarkable cases observed by
Brown-Sequard in guinea-pigs, of the inherited effects of operations,
should make us cautious in denying this tendency. Hence, it will
perhaps be safest to look at the entire absence of the anterior tarsi
in Ateuchus, and their rudimentary condition in some other genera, not
as cases of inherited mutilations, but as due to the effects of
long-continued disuse; for as many dung-feeding beetles are generally
found with their tarsi lost, this must happen early in life; therefore
the tarsi cannot be of much importance or be much used by these
insects.

In some cases we might easily put down to disuse modifications of
structure which are wholly, or mainly due to natural selection. Mr.
Wollaston has discovered the remarkable fact that 200 beetles, out of
the 550 species (but more are now known) inhabiting Madeira, are so far
deficient in wings that they cannot fly; and that, of the twenty-nine
endemic genera, no less than twenty-three have all their species in
this condition! Several facts, namely, that beetles in many parts of
the world are very frequently blown to sea and perish; that the beetles
in Madeira, as observed by Mr. Wollaston, lie much concealed, until the
wind lulls and the sun shines; that the proportion of wingless beetles
is larger on the exposed Desertas than in Madeira itself; and
especially the extraordinary fact, so strongly insisted on by Mr.
Wollaston, that certain large groups of beetles, elsewhere excessively
numerous, which absolutely require the use of their wings, are here
almost entirely absent. These several considerations make me believe
that the wingless condition of so many Madeira beetles is mainly due to
the action of natural selection, combined probably with disuse. For
during many successive generations each individual beetle which flew
least, either from its wings having been ever so little less perfectly
developed or from indolent habit, will have had the best chance of
surviving from not being blown out to sea; and, on the other hand,
those beetles which most readily took to flight would oftenest have
been blown to sea, and thus destroyed.

The insects in Madeira which are not ground-feeders, and which, as
certain flower-feeding coleoptera and lepidoptera, must habitually use
their wings to gain their subsistence, have, as Mr. Wollaston suspects,
their wings not at all reduced, but even enlarged. This is quite
compatible with the action of natural selection. For when a new insect
first arrived on the island, the tendency of natural selection to
enlarge or to reduce the wings, would depend on whether a greater
number of individuals were saved by successfully battling with the
winds, or by giving up the attempt and rarely or never flying. As with
mariners shipwrecked near a coast, it would have been better for the
good swimmers if they had been able to swim still further, whereas it
would have been better for the bad swimmers if they had not been able
to swim at all and had stuck to the wreck.

The eyes of moles and of some burrowing rodents are rudimentary in
size, and in some cases are quite covered by skin and fur. This state
of the eyes is probably due to gradual reduction from disuse, but aided
perhaps by natural selection. In South America, a burrowing rodent, the
tuco-tuco, or Ctenomys, is even more subterranean in its habits than
the mole; and I was assured by a Spaniard, who had often caught them,
that they were frequently blind. One which I kept alive was certainly
in this condition, the cause, as appeared on dissection, having been
inflammation of the nictitating membrane. As frequent inflammation of
the eyes must be injurious to any animal, and as eyes are certainly not
necessary to animals having subterranean habits, a reduction in their
size, with the adhesion of the eyelids and growth of fur over them,
might in such case be an advantage; and if so, natural selection would
aid the effects of disuse.

It is well known that several animals, belonging to the most different
classes, which inhabit the caves of Carniola and Kentucky, are blind.
In some of the crabs the foot-stalk for the eye remains, though the eye
is gone; the stand for the telescope is there, though the telescope
with its glasses has been lost. As it is difficult to imagine that
eyes, though useless, could be in any way injurious to animals living
in darkness, their loss may be attributed to disuse. In one of the
blind animals, namely, the cave-rat (Neotoma), two of which were
captured by Professor Silliman at above half a mile distance from the
mouth of the cave, and therefore not in the profoundest depths, the
eyes were lustrous and of large size; and these animals, as I am
informed by Professor Silliman, after having been exposed for about a
month to a graduated light, acquired a dim perception of objects.

It is difficult to imagine conditions of life more similar than deep
limestone caverns under a nearly similar climate; so that, in
accordance with the old view of the blind animals having been
separately created for the American and European caverns, very close
similarity in their organisation and affinities might have been
expected. This is certainly not the case if we look at the two whole
faunas; with respect to the insects alone, Schiödte has remarked: “We
are accordingly prevented from considering the entire phenomenon in any
other light than something purely local, and the similarity which is
exhibited in a few forms between the Mammoth Cave (in Kentucky) and the
caves in Carniola, otherwise than as a very plain expression of that
analogy which subsists generally between the fauna of Europe and of
North America.” On my view we must suppose that American animals,
having in most cases ordinary powers of vision, slowly migrated by
successive generations from the outer world into the deeper and deeper
recesses of the Kentucky caves, as did European animals into the caves
of Europe. We have some evidence of this gradation of habit; for, as
Schiödte remarks: “We accordingly look upon the subterranean faunas as
small ramifications which have penetrated into the earth from the
geographically limited faunas of the adjacent tracts, and which, as
they extended themselves into darkness, have been accommodated to
surrounding circumstances. Animals not far remote from ordinary forms,
prepare the transition from light to darkness. Next follow those that
are constructed for twilight; and, last of all, those destined for
total darkness, and whose formation is quite peculiar.” These remarks
of Schiödte’s it should be understood, apply not to the same, but to
distinct species. By the time that an animal had reached, after
numberless generations, the deepest recesses, disuse will on this view
have more or less perfectly obliterated its eyes, and natural selection
will often have effected other changes, such as an increase in the
length of the antennæ or palpi, as a compensation for blindness.
Notwithstanding such modifications, we might expect still to see in the
cave-animals of America, affinities to the other inhabitants of that
continent, and in those of Europe to the inhabitants of the European
continent. And this is the case with some of the American cave-animals,
as I hear from Professor Dana; and some of the European cave-insects
are very closely allied to those of the surrounding country. It would
be difficult to give any rational explanation of the affinities of the
blind cave-animals to the other inhabitants of the two continents on
the ordinary view of their independent creation. That several of the
inhabitants of the caves of the Old and New Worlds should be closely
related, we might expect from the well-known relationship of most of
their other productions. As a blind species of Bathyscia is found in
abundance on shady rocks far from caves, the loss of vision in the cave
species of this one genus has probably had no relation to its dark
habitation; for it is natural that an insect already deprived of vision
should readily become adapted to dark caverns. Another blind genus
(Anophthalmus) offers this remarkable peculiarity, that the species, as
Mr. Murray observes, have not as yet been found anywhere except in
caves; yet those which inhabit the several caves of Europe and America
are distinct; but it is possible that the progenitors of these several
species, while they were furnished with eyes, may formerly have ranged
over both continents, and then have become extinct, excepting in their
present secluded abodes. Far from feeling surprise that some of the
cave-animals should be very anomalous, as Agassiz has remarked in
regard to the blind fish, the Amblyopsis, and as is the case with the
blind Proteus, with reference to the reptiles of Europe, I am only
surprised that more wrecks of ancient life have not been preserved,
owing to the less severe competition to which the scanty inhabitants of
these dark abodes will have been exposed.

_Acclimatisation._

Habit is hereditary with plants, as in the period of flowering, in the
time of sleep, in the amount of rain requisite for seeds to germinate,
&c., and this leads me to say a few words on acclimatisation. As it is
extremely common for distinct species belonging to the same genus to
inhabit hot and cold countries, if it be true that all the species of
the same genus are descended from a single parent-form, acclimatisation
must be readily effected during a long course of descent. It is
notorious that each species is adapted to the climate of its own home:
species from an arctic or even from a temperate region cannot endure a
tropical climate, or conversely. So again, many succulent plants cannot
endure a damp climate. But the degree of adaptation of species to the
climates under which they live is often overrated. We may infer this
from our frequent inability to predict whether or not an imported plant
will endure our climate, and from the number of plants and animals
brought from different countries which are here perfectly healthy. We
have reason to believe that species in a state of nature are closely
limited in their ranges by the competition of other organic beings
quite as much as, or more than, by adaptation to particular climates.
But whether or not this adaptation is in most cases very close, we have
evidence with some few plants, of their becoming, to a certain extent,
naturally habituated to different temperatures; that is, they become
acclimatised: thus the pines and rhododendrons, raised from seed
collected by Dr. Hooker from the same species growing at different
heights on the Himalayas, were found to possess in this country
different constitutional powers of resisting cold. Mr. Thwaites informs
me that he has observed similar facts in Ceylon; analogous observations
have been made by Mr. H.C. Watson on European species of plants brought
from the Azores to England; and I could give other cases. In regard to
animals, several authentic instances could be adduced of species having
largely extended, within historical times, their range from warmer to
colder latitudes, and conversely; but we do not positively know that
these animals were strictly adapted to their native climate, though in
all ordinary cases we assume such to be the case; nor do we know that
they have subsequently become specially acclimatised to their new
homes, so as to be better fitted for them than they were at first.

As we may infer that our domestic animals were originally chosen by
uncivilised man because they were useful, and because they bred readily
under confinement, and not because they were subsequently found capable
of far-extended transportation, the common and extraordinary capacity
in our domestic animals of not only withstanding the most different
climates, but of being perfectly fertile (a far severer test) under
them, may be used as an argument that a large proportion of other
animals now in a state of nature could easily be brought to bear widely
different climates. We must not, however, push the foregoing argument
too far, on account of the probable origin of some of our domestic
animals from several wild stocks: the blood, for instance, of a
tropical and arctic wolf may perhaps be mingled in our domestic breeds.
The rat and mouse cannot be considered as domestic animals, but they
have been transported by man to many parts of the world, and now have a
far wider range than any other rodent; for they live under the cold
climate of Faroe in the north and of the Falklands in the south, and on
many an island in the torrid zones. Hence adaptation to any special
climate may be looked at as a quality readily grafted on an innate wide
flexibility of constitution, common to most animals. On this view, the
capacity of enduring the most different climates by man himself and by
his domestic animals, and the fact of the extinct elephant and
rhinoceros having formerly endured a glacial climate, whereas the
living species are now all tropical or sub-tropical in their habits,
ought not to be looked at as anomalies, but as examples of a very
common flexibility of constitution, brought, under peculiar
circumstances, into action.

How much of the acclimatisation of species to any peculiar climate is
due to mere habit, and how much to the natural selection of varieties
having different innate constitutions, and how much to both means
combined, is an obscure question. That habit or custom has some
influence, I must believe, both from analogy and from the incessant
advice given in agricultural works, even in the ancient Encyclopædias
of China, to be very cautious in transporting animals from one district
to another. And as it is not likely that man should have succeeded in
selecting so many breeds and sub-breeds with constitutions specially
fitted for their own districts, the result must, I think, be due to
habit. On the other hand, natural selection would inevitably tend to
preserve those individuals which were born with constitutions best
adapted to any country which they inhabited. In treatises on many kinds
of cultivated plants, certain varieties are said to withstand certain
climates better than others; this is strikingly shown in works on
fruit-trees published in the United States, in which certain varieties
are habitually recommended for the northern and others for the southern
states; and as most of these varieties are of recent origin, they
cannot owe their constitutional differences to habit. The case of the
Jerusalem artichoke, which is never propagated in England by seed, and
of which, consequently, new varieties have not been produced, has even
been advanced, as proving that acclimatisation cannot be effected, for
it is now as tender as ever it was! The case, also, of the kidney-bean
has been often cited for a similar purpose, and with much greater
weight; but until some one will sow, during a score of generations, his
kidney-beans so early that a very large proportion are destroyed by
frost, and then collect seed from the few survivors, with care to
prevent accidental crosses, and then again get seed from these
seedlings, with the same precautions, the experiment cannot be said to
have been even tried. Nor let it be supposed that differences in the
constitution of seedling kidney-beans never appear, for an account has
been published how much more hardy some seedlings are than others; and
of this fact I have myself observed striking instances.

On the whole, we may conclude that habit, or use and disuse, have, in
some cases, played a considerable part in the modification of the
constitution and structure; but that the effects have often been
largely combined with, and sometimes overmastered by, the natural
selection of innate variations.

_Correlated Variation_

I mean by this expression that the whole organisation is so tied
together, during its growth and development, that when slight
variations in any one part occur and are accumulated through natural
selection, other parts become modified. This is a very important
subject, most imperfectly understood, and no doubt wholly different
classes of facts may be here easily confounded together. We shall
presently see that simple inheritance often gives the false appearance
of correlation. One of the most obvious real cases is, that variations
of structure arising in the young or larvæ naturally tend to affect the
structure of the mature animal. The several parts which are homologous,
and which, at an early embryonic period, are identical in structure,
and which are necessarily exposed to similar conditions, seem eminently
liable to vary in a like manner: we see this in the right and left
sides of the body varying in the same manner; in the front and hind
legs, and even in the jaws and limbs, varying together, for the lower
jaw is believed by some anatomists to be homologous with the limbs.
These tendencies, I do not doubt, may be mastered more or less
completely by natural selection: thus a family of stags once existed
with an antler only on one side; and if this had been of any great use
to the breed, it might probably have been rendered permanent by natural
selection.

Homologous parts, as has been remarked by some authors, tend to cohere;
this is often seen in monstrous plants: and nothing is more common than
the union of homologous parts in normal structures, as in the union of
the petals into a tube. Hard parts seem to affect the form of adjoining
soft parts; it is believed by some authors that with birds the
diversity in the shape of the pelvis causes the remarkable diversity in
the shape of the kidneys. Others believe that the shape of the pelvis
in the human mother influences by pressure the shape of the head of the
child. In snakes, according to Schlegel, the shape of the body and the
manner of swallowing determine the position and form of several of the
most important viscera.

The nature of the bond is frequently quite obscure. M. Is. Geoffroy St.
Hilaire has forcibly remarked that certain malconformations frequently,
and that others rarely, coexist without our being able to assign any
reason. What can be more singular than the relation in cats between
complete whiteness and blue eyes with deafness, or between the
tortoise-shell colour and the female sex; or in pigeons, between their
feathered feet and skin betwixt the outer toes, or between the presence
of more or less down on the young pigeon when first hatched, with the
future colour of its plumage; or, again, the relation between the hair
and the teeth in the naked Turkish dog, though here no doubt homology
comes into play? With respect to this latter case of correlation, I
think it can hardly be accidental that the two orders of mammals which
are most abnormal in their dermal covering, viz., Cetacea (whales) and
Edentata (armadilloes, scaly ant-eaters, &c.), are likewise on the
whole the most abnormal in their teeth, but there are so many
exceptions to this rule, as Mr. Mivart has remarked, that it has little
value.

I know of no case better adapted to show the importance of the laws of
correlation and variation, independently of utility, and therefore of
natural selection, than that of the difference between the outer and
inner flowers in some Compositous and Umbelliferous plants. Everyone is
familiar with the difference between the ray and central florets of,
for instance, the daisy, and this difference is often accompanied with
the partial or complete abortion of the reproductive organs. But in
some of these plants the seeds also differ in shape and sculpture.
These differences have sometimes been attributed to the pressure of the
involucra on the florets, or to their mutual pressure, and the shape of
the seeds in the ray-florets of some Compositæ countenances this idea;
but with the Umbelliferæ it is by no means, as Dr. Hooker informs me,
the species with the densest heads which most frequently differ in
their inner and outer flowers. It might have been thought that the
development of the ray-petals, by drawing nourishment from the
reproductive organs causes their abortion; but this can hardly be the
sole case, for in some Compositæ the seeds of the outer and inner
florets differ, without any difference in the corolla. Possibly these
several differences may be connected with the different flow of
nutriment towards the central and external flowers. We know, at least,
that with irregular flowers those nearest to the axis are most subject
to peloria, that is to become abnormally symmetrical. I may add, as an
instance of this fact, and as a striking case of correlation, that in
many pelargoniums the two upper petals in the central flower of the
truss often lose their patches of darker colour; and when this occurs,
the adherent nectary is quite aborted, the central flower thus becoming
peloric or regular. When the colour is absent from only one of the two
upper petals, the nectary is not quite aborted but is much shortened.

With respect to the development of the corolla, Sprengel’s idea that
the ray-florets serve to attract insects, whose agency is highly
advantageous, or necessary for the fertilisation of these plants, is
highly probable; and if so, natural selection may have come into play.
But with respect to the seeds, it seems impossible that their
differences in shape, which are not always correlated with any
difference in the corolla, can be in any way beneficial; yet in the
Umbelliferæ these differences are of such apparent importance—the seeds
being sometimes orthospermous in the exterior flowers and cœlospermous
in the central flowers—that the elder De Candolle founded his main
divisions in the order on such characters. Hence modifications of
structure, viewed by systematists as of high value, may be wholly due
to the laws of variation and correlation, without being, as far as we
can judge, of the slightest service to the species.

We may often falsely attribute to correlated variation structures which
are common to whole groups of species, and which in truth are simply
due to inheritance; for an ancient progenitor may have acquired through
natural selection some one modification in structure, and, after
thousands of generations, some other and independent modification; and
these two modifications, having been transmitted to a whole group of
descendants with diverse habits, would naturally be thought to be in
some necessary manner correlated. Some other correlations are
apparently due to the manner in which natural selection can alone act.
For instance, Alph. De Candolle has remarked that winged seeds are
never found in fruits which do not open; I should explain this rule by
the impossibility of seeds gradually becoming winged through natural
selection, unless the capsules were open; for in this case alone could
the seeds, which were a little better adapted to be wafted by the wind,
gain an advantage over others less well fitted for wide dispersal.

_Compensation and Economy of Growth._

The elder Geoffroy and Goethe propounded, at about the same time, their
law of compensation or balancement of growth; or, as Goethe expressed
it, “in order to spend on one side, nature is forced to economise on
the other side.” I think this holds true to a certain extent with our
domestic productions: if nourishment flows to one part or organ in
excess, it rarely flows, at least in excess, to another part; thus it
is difficult to get a cow to give much milk and to fatten readily. The
same varieties of the cabbage do not yield abundant and nutritious
foliage and a copious supply of oil-bearing seeds. When the seeds in
our fruits become atrophied, the fruit itself gains largely in size and
quality. In our poultry, a large tuft of feathers on the head is
generally accompanied by a diminished comb, and a large beard by
diminished wattles. With species in a state of nature it can hardly be
maintained that the law is of universal application; but many good
observers, more especially botanists, believe in its truth. I will not,
however, here give any instances, for I see hardly any way of
distinguishing between the effects, on the one hand, of a part being
largely developed through natural selection and another and adjoining
part being reduced by the same process or by disuse, and, on the other
hand, the actual withdrawal of nutriment from one part owing to the
excess of growth in another and adjoining part.

I suspect, also, that some of the cases of compensation which have been
advanced, and likewise some other facts, may be merged under a more
general principle, namely, that natural selection is continually trying
to economise in every part of the organisation. If under changed
conditions of life a structure, before useful, becomes less useful, its
diminution will be favoured, for it will profit the individual not to
have its nutriment wasted in building up a useless structure. I can
thus only understand a fact with which I was much struck when examining
cirripedes, and of which many other instances could be given: namely,
that when a cirripede is parasitic within another cirripede and is thus
protected, it loses more or less completely its own shell or carapace.
This is the case with the male Ibla, and in a truly extraordinary
manner with the Proteolepas: for the carapace in all other cirripedes
consists of the three highly important anterior segments of the head
enormously developed, and furnished with great nerves and muscles; but
in the parasitic and protected Proteolepas, the whole anterior part of
the head is reduced to the merest rudiment attached to the bases of the
prehensile antennæ. Now the saving of a large and complex structure,
when rendered superfluous, would be a decided advantage to each
successive individual of the species; for in the struggle for life to
which every animal is exposed, each would have a better chance of
supporting itself, by less nutriment being wasted.

Thus, as I believe, natural selection will tend in the long run to
reduce any part of the organisation, as soon as it becomes, through
changed habits, superfluous, without by any means causing some other
part to be largely developed in a corresponding degree. And conversely,
that natural selection may perfectly well succeed in largely developing
an organ without requiring as a necessary compensation the reduction of
some adjoining part.

_Multiple, Rudimentary, and Lowly-organised Structures are Variable._

It seems to be a rule, as remarked by Is. Geoffroy St. Hilaire, both
with varieties and species, that when any part or organ is repeated
many times in the same individual (as the vertebræ in snakes, and the
stamens in polyandrous flowers) the number is variable; whereas the
number of the same part or organ, when it occurs in lesser numbers, is
constant. The same author as well as some botanists, have further
remarked that multiple parts are extremely liable to vary in structure.
As “vegetative repetition,” to use Professor Owen’s expression, is a
sign of low organisation; the foregoing statements accord with the
common opinion of naturalists, that beings which stand low in the scale
of nature are more variable than those which are higher. I presume that
lowness here means that the several parts of the organisation have been
but little specialised for particular functions; and as long as the
same part has to perform diversified work, we can perhaps see why it
should remain variable, that is, why natural selection should not have
preserved or rejected each little deviation of form so carefully as
when the part has to serve for some one special purpose. In the same
way that a knife which has to cut all sorts of things may be of almost
any shape; whilst a tool for some particular purpose must be of some
particular shape. Natural selection, it should never be forgotten, can
act solely through and for the advantage of each being.

Rudimentary parts, as is generally admitted, are apt to be highly
variable. We shall have to recur to this subject; and I will here only
add that their variability seems to result from their uselessness, and
consequently from natural selection having had no power to check
deviations in their structure.

_A Part developed in any Species in an extraordinary degree or manner,
in comparison with the same part in allied Species, tends to be highly
variable._

Several years ago I was much struck by a remark to the above effect
made by Mr. Waterhouse. Professor Owen, also, seems to have come to a
nearly similar conclusion. It is hopeless to attempt to convince any
one of the truth of the above proposition without giving the long array
of facts which I have collected, and which cannot possibly be here
introduced. I can only state my conviction that it is a rule of high
generality. I am aware of several causes of error, but I hope that I
have made due allowances for them. It should be understood that the
rule by no means applies to any part, however unusually developed,
unless it be unusually developed in one species or in a few species in
comparison with the same part in many closely allied species. Thus, the
wing of the bat is a most abnormal structure in the class of mammals;
but the rule would not apply here, because the whole group of bats
possesses wings; it would apply only if some one species had wings
developed in a remarkable manner in comparison with the other species
of the same genus. The rule applies very strongly in the case of
secondary sexual characters, when displayed in any unusual manner. The
term, secondary sexual characters, used by Hunter, relates to
characters which are attached to one sex, but are not directly
connected with the act of reproduction. The rule applies to males and
females; but more rarely to females, as they seldom offer remarkable
secondary sexual characters. The rule being so plainly applicable in
the case of secondary sexual characters, may be due to the great
variability of these characters, whether or not displayed in any
unusual manner—of which fact I think there can be little doubt. But
that our rule is not confined to secondary sexual characters is clearly
shown in the case of hermaphrodite cirripedes; I particularly attended
to Mr. Waterhouse’s remark, whilst investigating this Order, and I am
fully convinced that the rule almost always holds good. I shall, in a
future work, give a list of all the more remarkable cases. I will here
give only one, as it illustrates the rule in its largest application.
The opercular valves of sessile cirripedes (rock barnacles) are, in
every sense of the word, very important structures, and they differ
extremely little even in distinct genera; but in the several species of
one genus, Pyrgoma, these valves present a marvellous amount of
diversification; the homologous valves in the different species being
sometimes wholly unlike in shape; and the amount of variation in the
individuals of the same species is so great that it is no exaggeration
to state that the varieties of the same species differ more from each
other in the characters derived from these important organs, than do
the species belonging to other distinct genera.

As with birds the individuals of the same species, inhabiting the same
country, vary extremely little, I have particularly attended to them;
and the rule certainly seems to hold good in this class. I cannot make
out that it applies to plants, and this would have seriously shaken my
belief in its truth, had not the great variability in plants made it
particularly difficult to compare their relative degrees of
variability.

When we see any part or organ developed in a remarkable degree or
manner in a species, the fair presumption is that it is of high
importance to that species: nevertheless it is in this case eminently
liable to variation. Why should this be so? On the view that each
species has been independently created, with all its parts as we now
see them, I can see no explanation. But on the view that groups of
species are descended from some other species, and have been modified
through natural selection, I think we can obtain some light. First let
me make some preliminary remarks. If, in our domestic animals, any part
or the whole animal be neglected, and no selection be applied, that
part (for instance, the comb in the Dorking fowl) or the whole breed
will cease to have a uniform character: and the breed may be said to be
degenerating. In rudimentary organs, and in those which have been but
little specialised for any particular purpose, and perhaps in
polymorphic groups, we see a nearly parallel case; for in such cases
natural selection either has not or cannot come into full play, and
thus the organisation is left in a fluctuating condition. But what here
more particularly concerns us is, that those points in our domestic
animals, which at the present time are undergoing rapid change by
continued selection, are also eminently liable to variation. Look at
the individuals of the same breed of the pigeon; and see what a
prodigious amount of difference there is in the beak of tumblers, in
the beak and wattle of carriers, in the carriage and tail of fantails,
&c., these being the points now mainly attended to by English fanciers.
Even in the same sub-breed, as in that of the short-faced tumbler, it
is notoriously difficult to breed nearly perfect birds, many departing
widely from the standard. There may truly be said to be a constant
struggle going on between, on the one hand, the tendency to reversion
to a less perfect state, as well as an innate tendency to new
variations, and, on the other hand, the power of steady selection to
keep the breed true. In the long run selection gains the day, and we do
not expect to fail so completely as to breed a bird as coarse as a
common tumbler pigeon from a good short-faced strain. But as long as
selection is rapidly going on, much variability in the parts undergoing
modification may always be expected.

Now let us turn to nature. When a part has been developed in an
extraordinary manner in any one species, compared with the other
species of the same genus, we may conclude that this part has undergone
an extraordinary amount of modification since the period when the
several species branched off from the common progenitor of the genus.
This period will seldom be remote in any extreme degree, as species
rarely endure for more than one geological period. An extraordinary
amount of modification implies an unusually large and long-continued
amount of variability, which has continually been accumulated by
natural selection for the benefit of the species. But as the
variability of the extraordinarily developed part or organ has been so
great and long-continued within a period not excessively remote, we
might, as a general rule, still expect to find more variability in such
parts than in other parts of the organisation which have remained for a
much longer period nearly constant. And this, I am convinced, is the
case. That the struggle between natural selection on the one hand, and
the tendency to reversion and variability on the other hand, will in
the course of time cease; and that the most abnormally developed organs
may be made constant, I see no reason to doubt. Hence, when an organ,
however abnormal it may be, has been transmitted in approximately the
same condition to many modified descendants, as in the case of the wing
of the bat, it must have existed, according to our theory, for an
immense period in nearly the same state; and thus it has come not to be
more variable than any other structure. It is only in those cases in
which the modification has been comparatively recent and
extraordinarily great that we ought to find the _generative
variability_, as it may be called, still present in a high degree. For
in this case the variability will seldom as yet have been fixed by the
continued selection of the individuals varying in the required manner
and degree, and by the continued rejection of those tending to revert
to a former and less modified condition.

_Specific Characters more Variable than Generic Characters._

The principle discussed under the last heading may be applied to our
present subject. It is notorious that specific characters are more
variable than generic. To explain by a simple example what is meant: if
in a large genus of plants some species had blue flowers and some had
red, the colour would be only a specific character, and no one would be
surprised at one of the blue species varying into red, or conversely;
but if all the species had blue flowers, the colour would become a
generic character, and its variation would be a more unusual
circumstance. I have chosen this example because the explanation which
most naturalists would advance is not here applicable, namely, that
specific characters are more variable than generic, because they are
taken from parts of less physiological importance than those commonly
used for classing genera. I believe this explanation is partly, yet
only indirectly, true; I shall, however, have to return to this point
in the chapter on Classification. It would be almost superfluous to
adduce evidence in support of the statement, that ordinary specific
characters are more variable than generic; but with respect to
important characters, I have repeatedly noticed in works on natural
history, that when an author remarks with surprise that some important
organ or part, which is generally very constant throughout a large
group of species, _differs_ considerably in closely-allied species, it
is often _variable_ in the individuals of the same species. And this
fact shows that a character, which is generally of generic value, when
it sinks in value and becomes only of specific value, often becomes
variable, though its physiological importance may remain the same.
Something of the same kind applies to monstrosities: at least Is.
Geoffroy St. Hilaire apparently entertains no doubt, that the more an
organ normally differs in the different species of the same group, the
more subject it is to anomalies in the individuals.

On the ordinary view of each species having been independently created,
why should that part of the structure, which differs from the same part
in other independently created species of the same genus, be more
variable than those parts which are closely alike in the several
species? I do not see that any explanation can be given. But on the
view that species are only strongly marked and fixed varieties, we
might expect often to find them still continuing to vary in those parts
of their structure which have varied within a moderately recent period,
and which have thus come to differ. Or to state the case in another
manner: the points in which all the species of a genus resemble each
other, and in which they differ from allied genera, are called generic
characters; and these characters may be attributed to inheritance from
a common progenitor, for it can rarely have happened that natural
selection will have modified several distinct species, fitted to more
or less widely different habits, in exactly the same manner: and as
these so-called generic characters have been inherited from before the
period when the several species first branched off from their common
progenitor, and subsequently have not varied or come to differ in any
degree, or only in a slight degree, it is not probable that they should
vary at the present day. On the other hand, the points in which species
differ from other species of the same genus are called specific
characters; and as these specific characters have varied and come to
differ since the period when the species branched off from a common
progenitor, it is probable that they should still often be in some
degree variable—at least more variable than those parts of the
organisation which have for a very long period remained constant.

_Secondary Sexual Characters Variable._—I think it will be admitted by
naturalists, without my entering on details, that secondary sexual
characters are highly variable. It will also be admitted that species
of the same group differ from each other more widely in their secondary
sexual characters, than in other parts of their organisation; compare,
for instance, the amount of difference between the males of
gallinaceous birds, in which secondary sexual characters are strongly
displayed, with the amount of difference between the females. The cause
of the original variability of these characters is not manifest; but we
can see why they should not have been rendered as constant and uniform
as others, for they are accumulated by sexual selection, which is less
rigid in its action than ordinary selection, as it does not entail
death, but only gives fewer offspring to the less favoured males.
Whatever the cause may be of the variability of secondary sexual
characters, as they are highly variable, sexual selection will have had
a wide scope for action, and may thus have succeeded in giving to the
species of the same group a greater amount of difference in these than
in other respects.

It is a remarkable fact, that the secondary differences between the two
sexes of the same species are generally displayed in the very same
parts of the organisation in which the species of the same genus differ
from each other. Of this fact I will give in illustration the first two
instances which happen to stand on my list; and as the differences in
these cases are of a very unusual nature, the relation can hardly be
accidental. The same number of joints in the tarsi is a character
common to very large groups of beetles, but in the Engidæ, as Westwood
has remarked, the number varies greatly and the number likewise differs
in the two sexes of the same species. Again in the fossorial
hymenoptera, the neuration of the wings is a character of the highest
importance, because common to large groups; but in certain genera the
neuration differs in the different species, and likewise in the two
sexes of the same species. Sir J. Lubbock has recently remarked, that
several minute crustaceans offer excellent illustrations of this law.
“In Pontella, for instance, the sexual characters are afforded mainly
by the anterior antennæ and by the fifth pair of legs: the specific
differences also are principally given by these organs.” This relation
has a clear meaning on my view: I look at all the species of the same
genus as having as certainly descended from the same progenitor, as
have the two sexes of any one species. Consequently, whatever part of
the structure of the common progenitor, or of its early descendants,
became variable; variations of this part would, it is highly probable,
be taken advantage of by natural and sexual selection, in order to fit
the several places in the economy of nature, and likewise to fit the
two sexes of the same species to each other, or to fit the males to
struggle with other males for the possession of the females.

Finally, then, I conclude that the greater variability of specific
characters, or those which distinguish species from species, than of
generic characters, or those which are possessed by all the species;
that the frequent extreme variability of any part which is developed in
a species in an extraordinary manner in comparison with the same part
in its congeners; and the slight degree of variability in a part,
however extraordinarily it may be developed, if it be common to a whole
group of species; that the great variability of secondary sexual
characters and their great difference in closely allied species; that
secondary sexual and ordinary specific differences are generally
displayed in the same parts of the organisation, are all principles
closely connected together. All being mainly due to the species of the
same group being the descendants of a common progenitor, from whom they
have inherited much in common, to parts which have recently and largely
varied being more likely still to go on varying than parts which have
long been inherited and have not varied, to natural selection having
more or less completely, according to the lapse of time, overmastered
the tendency to reversion and to further variability, to sexual
selection being less rigid than ordinary selection, and to variations
in the same parts having been accumulated by natural and sexual
selection, and thus having been adapted for secondary sexual, and for
ordinary purposes.

_Distinct Species present analogous Variations, so that a Variety of
one Species often assumes a Character Proper to an allied Species, or
reverts to some of the Characters of an early Progenitor._—These
propositions will be most readily understood by looking to our domestic
races. The most distinct breeds of the pigeon, in countries widely
apart, present sub-varieties with reversed feathers on the head, and
with feathers on the feet, characters not possessed by the aboriginal
rock-pigeon; these then are analogous variations in two or more
distinct races. The frequent presence of fourteen or even sixteen
tail-feathers in the pouter may be considered as a variation
representing the normal structure of another race, the fantail. I
presume that no one will doubt that all such analogous variations are
due to the several races of the pigeon having inherited from a common
parent the same constitution and tendency to variation, when acted on
by similar unknown influences. In the vegetable kingdom we have a case
of analogous variation, in the enlarged stems, or as commonly called
roots, of the Swedish turnip and ruta-baga, plants which several
botanists rank as varieties produced by cultivation from a common
parent: if this be not so, the case will then be one of analogous
variation in two so-called distinct species; and to these a third may
be added, namely, the common turnip. According to the ordinary view of
each species having been independently created, we should have to
attribute this similarity in the enlarged stems of these three plants,
not to the vera causa of community of descent, and a consequent
tendency to vary in a like manner, but to three separate yet closely
related acts of creation. Many similar cases of analogous variation
have been observed by Naudin in the great gourd family, and by various
authors in our cereals. Similar cases occurring with insects under
natural conditions have lately been discussed with much ability by Mr.
Walsh, who has grouped them under his law of equable variability.

With pigeons, however, we have another case, namely, the occasional
appearance in all the breeds, of slaty-blue birds with two black bars
on the wings, white loins, a bar at the end of the tail, with the outer
feathers externally edged near their bases with white. As all these
marks are characteristic of the parent rock-pigeon, I presume that no
one will doubt that this is a case of reversion, and not of a new yet
analogous variation appearing in the several breeds. We may, I think,
confidently come to this conclusion, because, as we have seen, these
coloured marks are eminently liable to appear in the crossed offspring
of two distinct and differently coloured breeds; and in this case there
is nothing in the external conditions of life to cause the reappearance
of the slaty-blue, with the several marks, beyond the influence of the
mere act of crossing on the laws of inheritance.

No doubt it is a very surprising fact that characters should reappear
after having been lost for many, probably for hundreds of generations.
But when a breed has been crossed only once by some other breed, the
offspring occasionally show for many generations a tendency to revert
in character to the foreign breed—some say, for a dozen or even a score
of generations. After twelve generations, the proportion of blood, to
use a common expression, from one ancestor, is only 1 in 2048; and yet,
as we see, it is generally believed that a tendency to reversion is
retained by this remnant of foreign blood. In a breed which has not
been crossed, but in which _both_ parents have lost some character
which their progenitor possessed, the tendency, whether strong or weak,
to reproduce the lost character might, as was formerly remarked, for
all that we can see to the contrary, be transmitted for almost any
number of generations. When a character which has been lost in a breed,
reappears after a great number of generations, the most probable
hypothesis is, not that one individual suddenly takes after an ancestor
removed by some hundred generations, but that in each successive
generation the character in question has been lying latent, and at
last, under unknown favourable conditions, is developed. With the
barb-pigeon, for instance, which very rarely produces a blue bird, it
is probable that there is a latent tendency in each generation to
produce blue plumage. The abstract improbability of such a tendency
being transmitted through a vast number of generations, is not greater
than that of quite useless or rudimentary organs being similarly
transmitted. A mere tendency to produce a rudiment is indeed sometimes
thus inherited.

As all the species of the same genus are supposed to be descended from
a common progenitor, it might be expected that they would occasionally
vary in an analogous manner; so that the varieties of two or more
species would resemble each other, or that a variety of one species
would resemble in certain characters another and distinct species, this
other species being, according to our view, only a well-marked and
permanent variety. But characters exclusively due to analogous
variation would probably be of an unimportant nature, for the
preservation of all functionally important characters will have been
determined through natural selection, in accordance with the different
habits of the species. It might further be expected that the species of
the same genus would occasionally exhibit reversions to long-lost
characters. As, however, we do not know the common ancestor of any
natural group, we cannot distinguish between reversionary and analogous
characters. If, for instance, we did not know that the parent
rock-pigeon was not feather-footed or turn-crowned, we could not have
told, whether such characters in our domestic breeds were reversions or
only analogous variations; but we might have inferred that the blue
colour was a case of reversion from the number of the markings, which
are correlated with this tint, and which would not probably have all
appeared together from simple variation. More especially we might have
inferred this from the blue colour and the several marks so often
appearing when differently coloured breeds are crossed. Hence, although
under nature it must generally be left doubtful, what cases are
reversions to formerly existing characters, and what are new but
analogous variations, yet we ought, on our theory, sometimes to find
the varying offspring of a species assuming characters which are
already present in other members of the same group. And this
undoubtedly is the case.

The difficulty in distinguishing variable species is largely due to the
varieties mocking, as it were, other species of the same genus. A
considerable catalogue, also, could be given of forms intermediate
between two other forms, which themselves can only doubtfully be ranked
as species; and this shows, unless all these closely allied forms be
considered as independently created species, that they have in varying
assumed some of the characters of the others. But the best evidence of
analogous variations is afforded by parts or organs which are generally
constant in character, but which occasionally vary so as to resemble,
in some degree, the same part or organ in an allied species. I have
collected a long list of such cases; but here, as before, I lie under
the great disadvantage of not being able to give them. I can only
repeat that such cases certainly occur, and seem to me very remarkable.

I will, however, give one curious and complex case, not indeed as
affecting any important character, but from occurring in several
species of the same genus, partly under domestication and partly under
nature. It is a case almost certainly of reversion. The ass sometimes
has very distinct transverse bars on its legs, like those on the legs
of a zebra. It has been asserted that these are plainest in the foal,
and from inquiries which I have made, I believe this to be true. The
stripe on the shoulder is sometimes double, and is very variable in
length and outline. A white ass, but _not_ an albino, has been
described without either spinal or shoulder stripe; and these stripes
are sometimes very obscure, or actually quite lost, in dark-coloured
asses. The koulan of Pallas is said to have been seen with a double
shoulder-stripe. Mr. Blyth has seen a specimen of the hemionus with a
distinct shoulder-stripe, though it properly has none; and I have been
informed by Colonel Poole that foals of this species are generally
striped on the legs and faintly on the shoulder. The quagga, though so
plainly barred like a zebra over the body, is without bars on the legs;
but Dr. Gray has figured one specimen with very distinct zebra-like
bars on the hocks.

With respect to the horse, I have collected cases in England of the
spinal stripe in horses of the most distinct breeds, and of _all_
colours; transverse bars on the legs are not rare in duns, mouse-duns,
and in one instance in a chestnut; a faint shoulder-stripe may
sometimes be seen in duns, and I have seen a trace in a bay horse. My
son made a careful examination and sketch for me of a dun Belgian
cart-horse with a double stripe on each shoulder and with leg-stripes.
I have myself seen a dun Devonshire pony, and a small dun Welsh pony
has been carefully described to me, both with _three_ parallel stripes
on each shoulder.

In the northwest part of India the Kattywar breed of horses is so
generally striped, that, as I hear from Colonel Poole, who examined
this breed for the Indian Government, a horse without stripes is not
considered as purely bred. The spine is always striped; the legs are
generally barred; and the shoulder-stripe, which is sometimes double
and sometimes treble, is common; the side of the face, moreover, is
sometimes striped. The stripes are often plainest in the foal; and
sometimes quite disappear in old horses. Colonel Poole has seen both
gray and bay Kattywar horses striped when first foaled. I have also
reason to suspect, from information given me by Mr. W.W. Edwards, that
with the English race-horse the spinal stripe is much commoner in the
foal than in the full-grown animal. I have myself recently bred a foal
from a bay mare (offspring of a Turkoman horse and a Flemish mare) by a
bay English race-horse. This foal, when a week old, was marked on its
hinder quarters and on its forehead with numerous very narrow, dark,
zebra-like bars, and its legs were feebly striped. All the stripes soon
disappeared completely. Without here entering on further details I may
state that I have collected cases of leg and shoulder stripes in horses
of very different breeds in various countries from Britain to Eastern
China; and from Norway in the north to the Malay Archipelago in the
south. In all parts of the world these stripes occur far oftenest in
duns and mouse-duns; by the term dun a large range of colour is
included, from one between brown and black to a close approach to cream
colour.

I am aware that Colonel Hamilton Smith, who has written on this
subject, believes that the several breeds of the horse are descended
from several aboriginal species, one of which, the dun, was striped;
and that the above-described appearances are all due to ancient crosses
with the dun stock. But this view may be safely rejected, for it is
highly improbable that the heavy Belgian cart-horse, Welsh ponies,
Norwegian cobs, the lanky Kattywar race, &c., inhabiting the most
distant parts of the world, should have all have been crossed with one
supposed aboriginal stock.

Now let us turn to the effects of crossing the several species of the
horse genus. Rollin asserts that the common mule from the ass and horse
is particularly apt to have bars on its legs; according to Mr. Gosse,
in certain parts of the United States, about nine out of ten mules have
striped legs. I once saw a mule with its legs so much striped that any
one might have thought that it was a hybrid zebra; and Mr. W.C. Martin,
in his excellent treatise on the horse, has given a figure of a similar
mule. In four coloured drawings, which I have seen, of hybrids between
the ass and zebra, the legs were much more plainly barred than the rest
of the body; and in one of them there was a double shoulder-stripe. In
Lord Morton’s famous hybrid, from a chestnut mare and male quagga, the
hybrid and even the pure offspring subsequently produced from the same
mare by a black Arabian sire, were much more plainly barred across the
legs than is even the pure quagga. Lastly, and this is another most
remarkable case, a hybrid has been figured by Dr. Gray (and he informs
me that he knows of a second case) from the ass and the hemionus; and
this hybrid, though the ass only occasionally has stripes on his legs
and the hemionus has none and has not even a shoulder-stripe,
nevertheless had all four legs barred, and had three short
shoulder-stripes, like those on the dun Devonshire and Welsh ponies,
and even had some zebra-like stripes on the sides of its face. With
respect to this last fact, I was so convinced that not even a stripe of
colour appears from what is commonly called chance, that I was led
solely from the occurrence of the face-stripes on this hybrid from the
ass and hemionus to ask Colonel Poole whether such face-stripes ever
occurred in the eminently striped Kattywar breed of horses, and was, as
we have seen, answered in the affirmative.

What now are we to say to these several facts? We see several distinct
species of the horse genus becoming, by simple variation, striped on
the legs like a zebra, or striped on the shoulders like an ass. In the
horse we see this tendency strong whenever a dun tint appears—a tint
which approaches to that of the general colouring of the other species
of the genus. The appearance of the stripes is not accompanied by any
change of form, or by any other new character. We see this tendency to
become striped most strongly displayed in hybrids from between several
of the most distinct species. Now observe the case of the several
breeds of pigeons: they are descended from a pigeon (including two or
three sub-species or geographical races) of a bluish colour, with
certain bars and other marks; and when any breed assumes by simple
variation a bluish tint, these bars and other marks invariably
reappear; but without any other change of form or character. When the
oldest and truest breeds of various colours are crossed, we see a
strong tendency for the blue tint and bars and marks to reappear in the
mongrels. I have stated that the most probable hypothesis to account
for the reappearance of very ancient characters, is—that there is a
_tendency_ in the young of each successive generation to produce the
long-lost character, and that this tendency, from unknown causes,
sometimes prevails. And we have just seen that in several species of
the horse genus the stripes are either plainer or appear more commonly
in the young than in the old. Call the breeds of pigeons, some of which
have bred true for centuries, species; and how exactly parallel is the
case with that of the species of the horse genus! For myself, I venture
confidently to look back thousands on thousands of generations, and I
see an animal striped like a zebra, but perhaps otherwise very
differently constructed, the common parent of our domestic horse
(whether or not it be descended from one or more wild stocks) of the
ass, the hemionus, quagga, and zebra.

He who believes that each equine species was independently created,
will, I presume, assert that each species has been created with a
tendency to vary, both under nature and under domestication, in this
particular manner, so as often to become striped like the other species
of the genus; and that each has been created with a strong tendency,
when crossed with species inhabiting distant quarters of the world, to
produce hybrids resembling in their stripes, not their own parents, but
other species of the genus. To admit this view is, as it seems to me,
to reject a real for an unreal, or at least for an unknown cause. It
makes the works of God a mere mockery and deception; I would almost as
soon believe with the old and ignorant cosmogonists, that fossil shells
had never lived, but had been created in stone so as to mock the shells
now living on the sea-shore.

_Summary._—Our ignorance of the laws of variation is profound. Not in
one case out of a hundred can we pretend to assign any reason why this
or that part has varied. But whenever we have the means of instituting
a comparison, the same laws appear to have acted in producing the
lesser differences between varieties of the same species, and the
greater differences between species of the same genus. Changed
conditions generally induce mere fluctuating variability, but sometimes
they cause direct and definite effects; and these may become strongly
marked in the course of time, though we have not sufficient evidence on
this head. Habit in producing constitutional peculiarities, and use in
strengthening, and disuse in weakening and diminishing organs, appear
in many cases to have been potent in their effects. Homologous parts
tend to vary in the same manner, and homologous parts tend to cohere.
Modifications in hard parts and in external parts sometimes affect
softer and internal parts. When one part is largely developed, perhaps
it tends to draw nourishment from the adjoining parts; and every part
of the structure which can be saved without detriment will be saved.
Changes of structure at an early age may affect parts subsequently
developed; and many cases of correlated variation, the nature of which
we are unable to understand, undoubtedly occur. Multiple parts are
variable in number and in structure, perhaps arising from such parts
not having been closely specialised for any particular function, so
that their modifications have not been closely checked by natural
selection. It follows probably from this same cause, that organic
beings low in the scale are more variable than those standing higher in
the scale, and which have their whole organisation more specialised.
Rudimentary organs, from being useless, are not regulated by natural
selection, and hence are variable. Specific characters—that is, the
characters which have come to differ since the several species of the
same genus branched off from a common parent—are more variable than
generic characters, or those which have long been inherited, and have
not differed within this same period. In these remarks we have referred
to special parts or organs being still variable, because they have
recently varied and thus come to differ; but we have also seen in the
second chapter that the same principle applies to the whole individual;
for in a district where many species of a genus are found—that is,
where there has been much former variation and differentiation, or
where the manufactory of new specific forms has been actively at
work—in that district and among these species, we now find, on an
average, most varieties. Secondary sexual characters are highly
variable, and such characters differ much in the species of the same
group. Variability in the same parts of the organisation has generally
been taken advantage of in giving secondary sexual differences to the
two sexes of the same species, and specific differences to the several
species of the same genus. Any part or organ developed to an
extraordinary size or in an extraordinary manner, in comparison with
the same part or organ in the allied species, must have gone through an
extraordinary amount of modification since the genus arose; and thus we
can understand why it should often still be variable in a much higher
degree than other parts; for variation is a long-continued and slow
process, and natural selection will in such cases not as yet have had
time to overcome the tendency to further variability and to reversion
to a less modified state. But when a species with an extraordinarily
developed organ has become the parent of many modified
descendants—which on our view must be a very slow process, requiring a
long lapse of time—in this case, natural selection has succeeded in
giving a fixed character to the organ, in however extraordinary a
manner it may have been developed. Species inheriting nearly the same
constitution from a common parent, and exposed to similar influences,
naturally tend to present analogous variations, or these same species
may occasionally revert to some of the characters of their ancient
progenitors. Although new and important modifications may not arise
from reversion and analogous variation, such modifications will add to
the beautiful and harmonious diversity of nature.

Whatever the cause may be of each slight difference between the
offspring and their parents—and a cause for each must exist—we have
reason to believe that it is the steady accumulation of beneficial
differences which has given rise to all the more important
modifications of structure in relation to the habits of each species.

CHAPTER VI.
DIFFICULTIES OF THE THEORY.

Difficulties of the theory of descent with modification—Absence or
rarity of transitional varieties—Transitions in habits of
life—Diversified habits in the same species—Species with habits widely
different from those of their allies—Organs of extreme perfection—Modes
of transition—Cases of difficulty—Natura non facit saltum—Organs of
small importance—Organs not in all cases absolutely perfect—The law of
Unity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence embraced by the theory
of Natural Selection.

Long before the reader has arrived at this part of my work, a crowd of
difficulties will have occurred to him. Some of them are so serious
that to this day I can hardly reflect on them without being in some
degree staggered; but, to the best of my judgment, the greater number
are only apparent, and those that are real are not, I think, fatal to
the theory.

These difficulties and objections may be classed under the following
heads: First, why, if species have descended from other species by fine
gradations, do we not everywhere see innumerable transitional forms?
Why is not all nature in confusion, instead of the species being, as we
see them, well defined?

Secondly, is it possible that an animal having, for instance, the
structure and habits of a bat, could have been formed by the
modification of some other animal with widely different habits and
structure? Can we believe that natural selection could produce, on the
one hand, an organ of trifling importance, such as the tail of a
giraffe, which serves as a fly-flapper, and, on the other hand, an
organ so wonderful as the eye?

Thirdly, can instincts be acquired and modified through natural
selection? What shall we say to the instinct which leads the bee to
make cells, and which has practically anticipated the discoveries of
profound mathematicians?

Fourthly, how can we account for species, when crossed, being sterile
and producing sterile offspring, whereas, when varieties are crossed,
their fertility is unimpaired?

The two first heads will be here discussed; some miscellaneous
objections in the following chapter; Instinct and Hybridism in the two
succeeding chapters.

_On the Absence or Rarity of Transitional Varieties._—As natural
selection acts solely by the preservation of profitable modifications,
each new form will tend in a fully-stocked country to take the place
of, and finally to exterminate, its own less improved parent-form and
other less-favoured forms with which it comes into competition. Thus
extinction and natural selection go hand in hand. Hence, if we look at
each species as descended from some unknown form, both the parent and
all the transitional varieties will generally have been exterminated by
the very process of the formation and perfection of the new form.

But, as by this theory innumerable transitional forms must have
existed, why do we not find them embedded in countless numbers in the
crust of the earth? It will be more convenient to discuss this question
in the chapter on the imperfection of the geological record; and I will
here only state that I believe the answer mainly lies in the record
being incomparably less perfect than is generally supposed. The crust
of the earth is a vast museum; but the natural collections have been
imperfectly made, and only at long intervals of time.

But it may be urged that when several closely allied species inhabit
the same territory, we surely ought to find at the present time many
transitional forms. Let us take a simple case: in travelling from north
to south over a continent, we generally meet at successive intervals
with closely allied or representative species, evidently filling nearly
the same place in the natural economy of the land. These representative
species often meet and interlock; and as the one becomes rarer and
rarer, the other becomes more and more frequent, till the one replaces
the other. But if we compare these species where they intermingle, they
are generally as absolutely distinct from each other in every detail of
structure as are specimens taken from the metropolis inhabited by each.
By my theory these allied species are descended from a common parent;
and during the process of modification, each has become adapted to the
conditions of life of its own region, and has supplanted and
exterminated its original parent-form and all the transitional
varieties between its past and present states. Hence we ought not to
expect at the present time to meet with numerous transitional varieties
in each region, though they must have existed there, and may be
embedded there in a fossil condition. But in the intermediate region,
having intermediate conditions of life, why do we not now find
closely-linking intermediate varieties? This difficulty for a long time
quite confounded me. But I think it can be in large part explained.

In the first place we should be extremely cautious in inferring,
because an area is now continuous, that it has been continuous during a
long period. Geology would lead us to believe that most continents have
been broken up into islands even during the later tertiary periods; and
in such islands distinct species might have been separately formed
without the possibility of intermediate varieties existing in the
intermediate zones. By changes in the form of the land and of climate,
marine areas now continuous must often have existed within recent times
in a far less continuous and uniform condition than at present. But I
will pass over this way of escaping from the difficulty; for I believe
that many perfectly defined species have been formed on strictly
continuous areas; though I do not doubt that the formerly broken
condition of areas now continuous, has played an important part in the
formation of new species, more especially with freely-crossing and
wandering animals.

In looking at species as they are now distributed over a wide area, we
generally find them tolerably numerous over a large territory, then
becoming somewhat abruptly rarer and rarer on the confines, and finally
disappearing. Hence the neutral territory between two representative
species is generally narrow in comparison with the territory proper to
each. We see the same fact in ascending mountains, and sometimes it is
quite remarkable how abruptly, as Alph. De Candolle has observed, a
common alpine species disappears. The same fact has been noticed by E.
Forbes in sounding the depths of the sea with the dredge. To those who
look at climate and the physical conditions of life as the
all-important elements of distribution, these facts ought to cause
surprise, as climate and height or depth graduate away insensibly. But
when we bear in mind that almost every species, even in its metropolis,
would increase immensely in numbers, were it not for other competing
species; that nearly all either prey on or serve as prey for others; in
short, that each organic being is either directly or indirectly related
in the most important manner to other organic beings—we see that the
range of the inhabitants of any country by no means exclusively depends
on insensibly changing physical conditions, but in large part on the
presence of other species, on which it lives, or by which it is
destroyed, or with which it comes into competition; and as these
species are already defined objects, not blending one into another by
insensible gradations, the range of any one species, depending as it
does on the range of others, will tend to be sharply defined. Moreover,
each species on the confines of its range, where it exists in lessened
numbers, will, during fluctuations in the number of its enemies or of
its prey, or in the nature of the seasons, be extremely liable to utter
extermination; and thus its geographical range will come to be still
more sharply defined.

As allied or representative species, when inhabiting a continuous area,
are generally distributed in such a manner that each has a wide range,
with a comparatively narrow neutral territory between them, in which
they become rather suddenly rarer and rarer; then, as varieties do not
essentially differ from species, the same rule will probably apply to
both; and if we take a varying species inhabiting a very large area, we
shall have to adapt two varieties to two large areas, and a third
variety to a narrow intermediate zone. The intermediate variety,
consequently, will exist in lesser numbers from inhabiting a narrow and
lesser area; and practically, as far as I can make out, this rule holds
good with varieties in a state of nature. I have met with striking
instances of the rule in the case of varieties intermediate between
well-marked varieties in the genus Balanus. And it would appear from
information given me by Mr. Watson, Dr. Asa Gray, and Mr. Wollaston,
that generally, when varieties intermediate between two other forms
occur, they are much rarer numerically than the forms which they
connect. Now, if we may trust these facts and inferences, and conclude
that varieties linking two other varieties together generally have
existed in lesser numbers than the forms which they connect, then we
can understand why intermediate varieties should not endure for very
long periods: why, as a general rule, they should be exterminated and
disappear, sooner than the forms which they originally linked together.

For any form existing in lesser numbers would, as already remarked, run
a greater chance of being exterminated than one existing in large
numbers; and in this particular case the intermediate form would be
eminently liable to the inroads of closely allied forms existing on
both sides of it. But it is a far more important consideration, that
during the process of further modification, by which two varieties are
supposed to be converted and perfected into two distinct species, the
two which exist in larger numbers, from inhabiting larger areas, will
have a great advantage over the intermediate variety, which exists in
smaller numbers in a narrow and intermediate zone. For forms existing
in larger numbers will have a better chance, within any given period,
of presenting further favourable variations for natural selection to
seize on, than will the rarer forms which exist in lesser numbers.
Hence, the more common forms, in the race for life, will tend to beat
and supplant the less common forms, for these will be more slowly
modified and improved. It is the same principle which, as I believe,
accounts for the common species in each country, as shown in the second
chapter, presenting on an average a greater number of well-marked
varieties than do the rarer species. I may illustrate what I mean by
supposing three varieties of sheep to be kept, one adapted to an
extensive mountainous region; a second to a comparatively narrow, hilly
tract; and a third to the wide plains at the base; and that the
inhabitants are all trying with equal steadiness and skill to improve
their stocks by selection; the chances in this case will be strongly in
favour of the great holders on the mountains or on the plains improving
their breeds more quickly than the small holders on the intermediate
narrow, hilly tract; and consequently the improved mountain or plain
breed will soon take the place of the less improved hill breed; and
thus the two breeds, which originally existed in greater numbers, will
come into close contact with each other, without the interposition of
the supplanted, intermediate hill variety.

To sum up, I believe that species come to be tolerably well-defined
objects, and do not at any one period present an inextricable chaos of
varying and intermediate links: first, because new varieties are very
slowly formed, for variation is a slow process, and natural selection
can do nothing until favourable individual differences or variations
occur, and until a place in the natural polity of the country can be
better filled by some modification of some one or more of its
inhabitants. And such new places will depend on slow changes of
climate, or on the occasional immigration of new inhabitants, and,
probably, in a still more important degree, on some of the old
inhabitants becoming slowly modified, with the new forms thus produced
and the old ones acting and reacting on each other. So that, in any one
region and at any one time, we ought to see only a few species
presenting slight modifications of structure in some degree permanent;
and this assuredly we do see.

Secondly, areas now continuous must often have existed within the
recent period as isolated portions, in which many forms, more
especially among the classes which unite for each birth and wander
much, may have separately been rendered sufficiently distinct to rank
as representative species. In this case, intermediate varieties between
the several representative species and their common parent, must
formerly have existed within each isolated portion of the land, but
these links during the process of natural selection will have been
supplanted and exterminated, so that they will no longer be found in a
living state.

Thirdly, when two or more varieties have been formed in different
portions of a strictly continuous area, intermediate varieties will, it
is probable, at first have been formed in the intermediate zones, but
they will generally have had a short duration. For these intermediate
varieties will, from reasons already assigned (namely from what we know
of the actual distribution of closely allied or representative species,
and likewise of acknowledged varieties), exist in the intermediate
zones in lesser numbers than the varieties which they tend to connect.
From this cause alone the intermediate varieties will be liable to
accidental extermination; and during the process of further
modification through natural selection, they will almost certainly be
beaten and supplanted by the forms which they connect; for these, from
existing in greater numbers will, in the aggregate, present more
varieties, and thus be further improved through natural selection and
gain further advantages.

Lastly, looking not to any one time, but at all time, if my theory be
true, numberless intermediate varieties, linking closely together all
the species of the same group, must assuredly have existed; but the
very process of natural selection constantly tends, as has been so
often remarked, to exterminate the parent forms and the intermediate
links. Consequently evidence of their former existence could be found
only among fossil remains, which are preserved, as we shall attempt to
show in a future chapter, in an extremely imperfect and intermittent
record.

_On the Origin and Transition of Organic Beings with peculiar Habits
and Structure._—It has been asked by the opponents of such views as I
hold, how, for instance, could a land carnivorous animal have been
converted into one with aquatic habits; for how could the animal in its
transitional state have subsisted? It would be easy to show that there
now exist carnivorous animals presenting close intermediate grades from
strictly terrestrial to aquatic habits; and as each exists by a
struggle for life, it is clear that each must be well adapted to its
place in nature. Look at the Mustela vison of North America, which has
webbed feet, and which resembles an otter in its fur, short legs, and
form of tail; during summer this animal dives for and preys on fish,
but during the long winter it leaves the frozen waters, and preys, like
other polecats on mice and land animals. If a different case had been
taken, and it had been asked how an insectivorous quadruped could
possibly have been converted into a flying bat, the question would have
been far more difficult to answer. Yet I think such difficulties have
little weight.

Here, as on other occasions, I lie under a heavy disadvantage, for, out
of the many striking cases which I have collected, I can give only one
or two instances of transitional habits and structures in allied
species; and of diversified habits, either constant or occasional, in
the same species. And it seems to me that nothing less than a long list
of such cases is sufficient to lessen the difficulty in any particular
case like that of the bat.

Look at the family of squirrels; here we have the finest gradation from
animals with their tails only slightly flattened, and from others, as
Sir J. Richardson has remarked, with the posterior part of their bodies
rather wide and with the skin on their flanks rather full, to the
so-called flying squirrels; and flying squirrels have their limbs and
even the base of the tail united by a broad expanse of skin, which
serves as a parachute and allows them to glide through the air to an
astonishing distance from tree to tree. We cannot doubt that each
structure is of use to each kind of squirrel in its own country, by
enabling it to escape birds or beasts of prey, or to collect food more
quickly, or, as there is reason to believe, to lessen the danger from
occasional falls. But it does not follow from this fact that the
structure of each squirrel is the best that it is possible to conceive
under all possible conditions. Let the climate and vegetation change,
let other competing rodents or new beasts of prey immigrate, or old
ones become modified, and all analogy would lead us to believe that
some, at least, of the squirrels would decrease in numbers or become
exterminated, unless they also become modified and improved in
structure in a corresponding manner. Therefore, I can see no
difficulty, more especially under changing conditions of life, in the
continued preservation of individuals with fuller and fuller
flank-membranes, each modification being useful, each being propagated,
until, by the accumulated effects of this process of natural selection,
a perfect so-called flying squirrel was produced.

Now look at the Galeopithecus or so-called flying lemur, which was
formerly ranked among bats, but is now believed to belong to the
Insectivora. An extremely wide flank-membrane stretches from the
corners of the jaw to the tail, and includes the limbs with the
elongated fingers. This flank-membrane is furnished with an extensor
muscle. Although no graduated links of structure, fitted for gliding
through the air, now connect the Galeopithecus with the other
Insectivora, yet there is no difficulty in supposing that such links
formerly existed, and that each was developed in the same manner as
with the less perfectly gliding squirrels; each grade of structure
having been useful to its possessor. Nor can I see any insuperable
difficulty in further believing it possible that the membrane-connected
fingers and fore-arm of the Galeopithecus might have been greatly
lengthened by natural selection; and this, as far as the organs of
flight are concerned, would have converted the animal into a bat. In
certain bats in which the wing-membrane extends from the top of the
shoulder to the tail and includes the hind-legs, we perhaps see traces
of an apparatus originally fitted for gliding through the air rather
than for flight.

If about a dozen genera of birds were to become extinct, who would have
ventured to surmise that birds might have existed which used their
wings solely as flappers, like the logger headed duck (Micropterus of
Eyton); as fins in the water and as front legs on the land, like the
penguin; as sails, like the ostrich; and functionally for no purpose,
like the apteryx? Yet the structure of each of these birds is good for
it, under the conditions of life to which it is exposed, for each has
to live by a struggle: but it is not necessarily the best possible
under all possible conditions. It must not be inferred from these
remarks that any of the grades of wing-structure here alluded to, which
perhaps may all be the result of disuse, indicate the steps by which
birds actually acquired their perfect power of flight; but they serve
to show what diversified means of transition are at least possible.

Seeing that a few members of such water-breathing classes as the
Crustacea and Mollusca are adapted to live on the land; and seeing that
we have flying birds and mammals, flying insects of the most
diversified types, and formerly had flying reptiles, it is conceivable
that flying-fish, which now glide far through the air, slightly rising
and turning by the aid of their fluttering fins, might have been
modified into perfectly winged animals. If this had been effected, who
would have ever imagined that in an early transitional state they had
been inhabitants of the open ocean, and had used their incipient organs
of flight exclusively, so far as we know, to escape being devoured by
other fish?

When we see any structure highly perfected for any particular habit, as
the wings of a bird for flight, we should bear in mind that animals
displaying early transitional grades of the structure will seldom have
survived to the present day, for they will have been supplanted by
their successors, which were gradually rendered more perfect through
natural selection. Furthermore, we may conclude that transitional
states between structures fitted for very different habits of life will
rarely have been developed at an early period in great numbers and
under many subordinate forms. Thus, to return to our imaginary
illustration of the flying-fish, it does not seem probable that fishes
capable of true flight would have been developed under many subordinate
forms, for taking prey of many kinds in many ways, on the land and in
the water, until their organs of flight had come to a high stage of
perfection, so as to have given them a decided advantage over other
animals in the battle for life. Hence the chance of discovering species
with transitional grades of structure in a fossil condition will always
be less, from their having existed in lesser numbers, than in the case
of species with fully developed structures.

I will now give two or three instances, both of diversified and of
changed habits, in the individuals of the same species. In either case
it would be easy for natural selection to adapt the structure of the
animal to its changed habits, or exclusively to one of its several
habits. It is, however, difficult to decide and immaterial for us,
whether habits generally change first and structure afterwards; or
whether slight modifications of structure lead to changed habits; both
probably often occurring almost simultaneously. Of cases of changed
habits it will suffice merely to allude to that of the many British
insects which now feed on exotic plants, or exclusively on artificial
substances. Of diversified habits innumerable instances could be given:
I have often watched a tyrant flycatcher (Saurophagus sulphuratus) in
South America, hovering over one spot and then proceeding to another,
like a kestrel, and at other times standing stationary on the margin of
water, and then dashing into it like a kingfisher at a fish. In our own
country the larger titmouse (Parus major) may be seen climbing
branches, almost like a creeper; it sometimes, like a shrike, kills
small birds by blows on the head; and I have many times seen and heard
it hammering the seeds of the yew on a branch, and thus breaking them
like a nuthatch. In North America the black bear was seen by Hearne
swimming for hours with widely open mouth, thus catching, almost like a
whale, insects in the water.

As we sometimes see individuals following habits different from those
proper to their species and to the other species of the same genus, we
might expect that such individuals would occasionally give rise to new
species, having anomalous habits, and with their structure either
slightly or considerably modified from that of their type. And such
instances occur in nature. Can a more striking instance of adaptation
be given than that of a woodpecker for climbing trees and seizing
insects in the chinks of the bark? Yet in North America there are
woodpeckers which feed largely on fruit, and others with elongated
wings which chase insects on the wing. On the plains of La Plata, where
hardly a tree grows, there is a woodpecker (Colaptes campestris) which
has two toes before and two behind, a long-pointed tongue, pointed
tail-feathers, sufficiently stiff to support the bird in a vertical
position on a post, but not so stiff as in the typical wood-peckers,
and a straight, strong beak. The beak, however, is not so straight or
so strong as in the typical woodpeckers but it is strong enough to bore
into wood. Hence this Colaptes, in all the essential parts of its
structure, is a woodpecker. Even in such trifling characters as the
colouring, the harsh tone of the voice, and undulatory flight, its
close blood-relationship to our common woodpecker is plainly declared;
yet, as I can assert, not only from my own observations, but from those
of the accurate Azara, in certain large districts it does not climb
trees, and it makes its nest in holes in banks! In certain other
districts, however, this same woodpecker, as Mr. Hudson states,
frequents trees, and bores holes in the trunk for its nest. I may
mention as another illustration of the varied habits of this genus,
that a Mexican Colaptes has been described by De Saussure as boring
holes into hard wood in order to lay up a store of acorns.

Petrels are the most aërial and oceanic of birds, but, in the quiet
sounds of Tierra del Fuego, the Puffinuria berardi, in its general
habits, in its astonishing power of diving, in its manner of swimming
and of flying when made to take flight, would be mistaken by any one
for an auk or a grebe; nevertheless, it is essentially a petrel, but
with many parts of its organisation profoundly modified in relation to
its new habits of life; whereas the woodpecker of La Plata has had its
structure only slightly modified. In the case of the water-ouzel, the
acutest observer, by examining its dead body, would never have
suspected its sub-aquatic habits; yet this bird, which is allied to the
thrush family, subsists by diving,—using its wings under water and
grasping stones with its feet. All the members of the great order of
Hymenopterous insects are terrestrial, excepting the genus
Proctotrupes, which Sir John Lubbock has discovered to be aquatic in
its habits; it often enters the water and dives about by the use not of
its legs but of its wings, and remains as long as four hours beneath
the surface; yet it exhibits no modification in structure in accordance
with its abnormal habits.

He who believes that each being has been created as we now see it, must
occasionally have felt surprise when he has met with an animal having
habits and structure not in agreement. What can be plainer than that
the webbed feet of ducks and geese are formed for swimming? Yet there
are upland geese with webbed feet which rarely go near the water; and
no one except Audubon, has seen the frigate-bird, which has all its
four toes webbed, alight on the surface of the ocean. On the other
hand, grebes and coots are eminently aquatic, although their toes are
only bordered by membrane. What seems plainer than that the long toes,
not furnished with membrane, of the Grallatores, are formed for walking
over swamps and floating plants. The water-hen and landrail are members
of this order, yet the first is nearly as aquatic as the coot, and the
second is nearly as terrestrial as the quail or partridge. In such
cases, and many others could be given, habits have changed without a
corresponding change of structure. The webbed feet of the upland goose
may be said to have become almost rudimentary in function, though not
in structure. In the frigate-bird, the deeply scooped membrane between
the toes shows that structure has begun to change.

He who believes in separate and innumerable acts of creation may say,
that in these cases it has pleased the Creator to cause a being of one
type to take the place of one belonging to another type; but this seems
to me only restating the fact in dignified language. He who believes in
the struggle for existence and in the principle of natural selection,
will acknowledge that every organic being is constantly endeavouring to
increase in numbers; and that if any one being varies ever so little,
either in habits or structure, and thus gains an advantage over some
other inhabitant of the same country, it will seize on the place of
that inhabitant, however different that may be from its own place.
Hence it will cause him no surprise that there should be geese and
frigate-birds with webbed feet, living on the dry land and rarely
alighting on the water, that there should be long-toed corncrakes,
living in meadows instead of in swamps; that there should be
woodpeckers where hardly a tree grows; that there should be diving
thrushes and diving Hymenoptera, and petrels with the habits of auks.

_Organs of extreme Perfection and Complication._

To suppose that the eye with all its inimitable contrivances for
adjusting the focus to different distances, for admitting different
amounts of light, and for the correction of spherical and chromatic
aberration, could have been formed by natural selection, seems, I
freely confess, absurd in the highest degree. When it was first said
that the sun stood still and the world turned round, the common sense
of mankind declared the doctrine false; but the old saying of _Vox
populi, vox Dei_, as every philosopher knows, cannot be trusted in
science. Reason tells me, that if numerous gradations from a simple and
imperfect eye to one complex and perfect can be shown to exist, each
grade being useful to its possessor, as is certainly the case; if
further, the eye ever varies and the variations be inherited, as is
likewise certainly the case; and if such variations should be useful to
any animal under changing conditions of life, then the difficulty of
believing that a perfect and complex eye could be formed by natural
selection, though insuperable by our imagination, should not be
considered as subversive of the theory. How a nerve comes to be
sensitive to light, hardly concerns us more than how life itself
originated; but I may remark that, as some of the lowest organisms in
which nerves cannot be detected, are capable of perceiving light, it
does not seem impossible that certain sensitive elements in their
sarcode should become aggregated and developed into nerves, endowed
with this special sensibility.

In searching for the gradations through which an organ in any species
has been perfected, we ought to look exclusively to its lineal
progenitors; but this is scarcely ever possible, and we are forced to
look to other species and genera of the same group, that is to the
collateral descendants from the same parent-form, in order to see what
gradations are possible, and for the chance of some gradations having
been transmitted in an unaltered or little altered condition. But the
state of the same organ in distinct classes may incidentally throw
light on the steps by which it has been perfected.

The simplest organ which can be called an eye consists of an optic
nerve, surrounded by pigment-cells and covered by translucent skin, but
without any lens or other refractive body. We may, however, according
to M. Jourdain, descend even a step lower and find aggregates of
pigment-cells, apparently serving as organs of vision, without any
nerves, and resting merely on sarcodic tissue. Eyes of the above simple
nature are not capable of distinct vision, and serve only to
distinguish light from darkness. In certain star-fishes, small
depressions in the layer of pigment which surrounds the nerve are
filled, as described by the author just quoted, with transparent
gelatinous matter, projecting with a convex surface, like the cornea in
the higher animals. He suggests that this serves not to form an image,
but only to concentrate the luminous rays and render their perception
more easy. In this concentration of the rays we gain the first and by
far the most important step towards the formation of a true,
picture-forming eye; for we have only to place the naked extremity of
the optic nerve, which in some of the lower animals lies deeply buried
in the body, and in some near the surface, at the right distance from
the concentrating apparatus, and an image will be formed on it.

In the great class of the Articulata, we may start from an optic nerve
simply coated with pigment, the latter sometimes forming a sort of
pupil, but destitute of lens or other optical contrivance. With insects
it is now known that the numerous facets on the cornea of their great
compound eyes form true lenses, and that the cones include curiously
modified nervous filaments. But these organs in the Articulata are so
much diversified that Müller formerly made three main classes with
seven subdivisions, besides a fourth main class of aggregated simple
eyes.

When we reflect on these facts, here given much too briefly, with
respect to the wide, diversified, and graduated range of structure in
the eyes of the lower animals; and when we bear in mind how small the
number of all living forms must be in comparison with those which have
become extinct, the difficulty ceases to be very great in believing
that natural selection may have converted the simple apparatus of an
optic nerve, coated with pigment and invested by transparent membrane,
into an optical instrument as perfect as is possessed by any member of
the Articulata class.

He who will go thus far, ought not to hesitate to go one step further,
if he finds on finishing this volume that large bodies of facts,
otherwise inexplicable, can be explained by the theory of modification
through natural selection; he ought to admit that a structure even as
perfect as an eagle’s eye might thus be formed, although in this case
he does not know the transitional states. It has been objected that in
order to modify the eye and still preserve it as a perfect instrument,
many changes would have to be effected simultaneously, which, it is
assumed, could not be done through natural selection; but as I have
attempted to show in my work on the variation of domestic animals, it
is not necessary to suppose that the modifications were all
simultaneous, if they were extremely slight and gradual. Different
kinds of modification would, also, serve for the same general purpose:
as Mr. Wallace has remarked, “If a lens has too short or too long a
focus, it may be amended either by an alteration of curvature, or an
alteration of density; if the curvature be irregular, and the rays do
not converge to a point, then any increased regularity of curvature
will be an improvement. So the contraction of the iris and the muscular
movements of the eye are neither of them essential to vision, but only
improvements which might have been added and perfected at any stage of
the construction of the instrument.” Within the highest division of the
animal kingdom, namely, the Vertebrata, we can start from an eye so
simple, that it consists, as in the lancelet, of a little sack of
transparent skin, furnished with a nerve and lined with pigment, but
destitute of any other apparatus. In fishes and reptiles, as Owen has
remarked, “The range of gradation of dioptric structures is very
great.” It is a significant fact that even in man, according to the
high authority of Virchow, the beautiful crystalline lens is formed in
the embryo by an accumulation of epidermic cells, lying in a sack-like
fold of the skin; and the vitreous body is formed from embryonic
subcutaneous tissue. To arrive, however, at a just conclusion regarding
the formation of the eye, with all its marvellous yet not absolutely
perfect characters, it is indispensable that the reason should conquer
the imagination; but I have felt the difficulty far to keenly to be
surprised at others hesitating to extend the principle of natural
selection to so startling a length.

It is scarcely possible to avoid comparing the eye with a telescope. We
know that this instrument has been perfected by the long-continued
efforts of the highest human intellects; and we naturally infer that
the eye has been formed by a somewhat analogous process. But may not
this inference be presumptuous? Have we any right to assume that the
Creator works by intellectual powers like those of man? If we must
compare the eye to an optical instrument, we ought in imagination to
take a thick layer of transparent tissue, with spaces filled with
fluid, and with a nerve sensitive to light beneath, and then suppose
every part of this layer to be continually changing slowly in density,
so as to separate into layers of different densities and thicknesses,
placed at different distances from each other, and with the surfaces of
each layer slowly changing in form. Further we must suppose that there
is a power, represented by natural selection or the survival of the
fittest, always intently watching each slight alteration in the
transparent layers; and carefully preserving each which, under varied
circumstances, in any way or degree, tends to produce a distincter
image. We must suppose each new state of the instrument to be
multiplied by the million; each to be preserved until a better is
produced, and then the old ones to be all destroyed. In living bodies,
variation will cause the slight alteration, generation will multiply
them almost infinitely, and natural selection will pick out with
unerring skill each improvement. Let this process go on for millions of
years; and during each year on millions of individuals of many kinds;
and may we not believe that a living optical instrument might thus be
formed as superior to one of glass, as the works of the Creator are to
those of man?

_Modes of Transition._

If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed, which could
not possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight
modifications, my theory would absolutely break down. But I can find
out no such case. No doubt many organs exist of which we do not know
the transitional grades, more especially if we look to much-isolated
species, around which, according to the theory, there has been much
extinction. Or again, if we take an organ common to all the members of
a class, for in this latter case the organ must have been originally
formed at a remote period, since which all the many members of the
class have been developed; and in order to discover the early
transitional grades through which the organ has passed, we should have
to look to very ancient ancestral forms, long since become extinct.

We should be extremely cautious in concluding that an organ could not
have been formed by transitional gradations of some kind. Numerous
cases could be given among the lower animals of the same organ
performing at the same time wholly distinct functions; thus in the
larva of the dragon-fly and in the fish Cobites the alimentary canal
respires, digests, and excretes. In the Hydra, the animal may be turned
inside out, and the exterior surface will then digest and the stomach
respire. In such cases natural selection might specialise, if any
advantage were thus gained, the whole or part of an organ, which had
previously performed two functions, for one function alone, and thus by
insensible steps greatly change its nature. Many plants are known which
regularly produce at the same time differently constructed flowers; and
if such plants were to produce one kind alone, a great change would be
effected with comparative suddenness in the character of the species.
It is, however, probable that the two sorts of flowers borne by the
same plant were originally differentiated by finely graduated steps,
which may still be followed in some few cases.

Again, two distinct organs, or the same organ under two very different
forms, may simultaneously perform in the same individual the same
function, and this is an extremely important means of transition: to
give one instance—there are fish with gills or branchiæ that breathe
the air dissolved in the water, at the same time that they breathe free
air in their swim-bladders, this latter organ being divided by highly
vascular partitions and having a ductus pneumaticus for the supply of
air. To give another instance from the vegetable kingdom: plants climb
by three distinct means, by spirally twining, by clasping a support
with their sensitive tendrils, and by the emission of aërial rootlets;
these three means are usually found in distinct groups, but some few
species exhibit two of the means, or even all three, combined in the
same individual. In all such cases one of the two organs might readily
be modified and perfected so as to perform all the work, being aided
during the progress of modification by the other organ; and then this
other organ might be modified for some other and quite distinct
purpose, or be wholly obliterated.

The illustration of the swim-bladder in fishes is a good one, because
it shows us clearly the highly important fact that an organ originally
constructed for one purpose, namely flotation, may be converted into
one for a widely different purpose, namely respiration. The
swim-bladder has, also, been worked in as an accessory to the auditory
organs of certain fishes. All physiologists admit that the swim-bladder
is homologous, or “ideally similar” in position and structure with the
lungs of the higher vertebrate animals: hence there is no reason to
doubt that the swim-bladder has actually been converted into lungs, or
an organ used exclusively for respiration.

According to this view it may be inferred that all vertebrate animals
with true lungs are descended by ordinary generation from an ancient
and unknown prototype which was furnished with a floating apparatus or
swim-bladder. We can thus, as I infer from Professor Owen’s interesting
description of these parts, understand the strange fact that every
particle of food and drink which we swallow has to pass over the
orifice of the trachea, with some risk of falling into the lungs,
notwithstanding the beautiful contrivance by which the glottis is
closed. In the higher Vertebrata the branchiæ have wholly
disappeared—but in the embryo the slits on the sides of the neck and
the loop-like course of the arteries still mark their former position.
But it is conceivable that the now utterly lost branchiæ might have
been gradually worked in by natural selection for some distinct
purpose: for instance, Landois has shown that the wings of insects are
developed from the trachea; it is therefore highly probable that in
this great class organs which once served for respiration have been
actually converted into organs for flight.

In considering transitions of organs, it is so important to bear in
mind the probability of conversion from one function to another, that I
will give another instance. Pedunculated cirripedes have two minute
folds of skin, called by me the ovigerous frena, which serve, through
the means of a sticky secretion, to retain the eggs until they are
hatched within the sack. These cirripedes have no branchiæ, the whole
surface of the body and of the sack, together with the small frena,
serving for respiration. The Balanidæ or sessile cirripedes, on the
other hand, have no ovigerous frena, the eggs lying loose at the bottom
of the sack, within the well-enclosed shell; but they have, in the same
relative position with the frena, large, much-folded membranes, which
freely communicate with the circulatory lacunæ of the sack and body,
and which have been considered by all naturalists to act as branchiæ.
Now I think no one will dispute that the ovigerous frena in the one
family are strictly homologous with the branchiæ of the other family;
indeed, they graduate into each other. Therefore it need not be doubted
that the two little folds of skin, which originally served as ovigerous
frena, but which, likewise, very slightly aided in the act of
respiration, have been gradually converted by natural selection into
branchiæ, simply through an increase in their size and the obliteration
of their adhesive glands. If all pedunculated cirripedes had become
extinct, and they have suffered far more extinction than have sessile
cirripedes, who would ever have imagined that the branchiæ in this
latter family had originally existed as organs for preventing the ova
from being washed out of the sack?

There is another possible mode of transition, namely, through the
acceleration or retardation of the period of reproduction. This has
lately been insisted on by Professor Cope and others in the United
States. It is now known that some animals are capable of reproduction
at a very early age, before they have acquired their perfect
characters; and if this power became thoroughly well developed in a
species, it seems probable that the adult stage of development would
sooner or later be lost; and in this case, especially if the larva
differed much from the mature form, the character of the species would
be greatly changed and degraded. Again, not a few animals, after
arriving at maturity, go on changing in character during nearly their
whole lives. With mammals, for instance, the form of the skull is often
much altered with age, of which Dr. Murie has given some striking
instances with seals. Every one knows how the horns of stags become
more and more branched, and the plumes of some birds become more finely
developed, as they grow older. Professor Cope states that the teeth of
certain lizards change much in shape with advancing years. With
crustaceans not only many trivial, but some important parts assume a
new character, as recorded by Fritz Müller, after maturity. In all such
cases—and many could be given—if the age for reproduction were
retarded, the character of the species, at least in its adult state,
would be modified; nor is it improbable that the previous and earlier
stages of development would in some cases be hurried through and
finally lost. Whether species have often or ever been modified through
this comparatively sudden mode of transition, I can form no opinion;
but if this has occurred, it is probable that the differences between
the young and the mature, and between the mature and the old, were
primordially acquired by graduated steps.

_Special Diffculties of the Theory of Natural Selection._

Although we must be extremely cautious in concluding that any organ
could not have been produced by successive, small, transitional
gradations, yet undoubtedly serious cases of difficulty occur.

One of the most serious is that of neuter insects, which are often
differently constructed from either the males or fertile females; but
this case will be treated of in the next chapter. The electric organs
of fishes offer another case of special difficulty; for it is
impossible to conceive by what steps these wondrous organs have been
produced. But this is not surprising, for we do not even know of what
use they are. In the gymnotus and torpedo they no doubt serve as
powerful means of defence, and perhaps for securing prey; yet in the
ray, as observed by Matteucci, an analogous organ in the tail manifests
but little electricity, even when the animal is greatly irritated; so
little that it can hardly be of any use for the above purposes.
Moreover, in the ray, besides the organ just referred to, there is, as
Dr. R. McDonnell has shown, another organ near the head, not known to
be electrical, but which appears to be the real homologue of the
electric battery in the torpedo. It is generally admitted that there
exists between these organs and ordinary muscle a close analogy, in
intimate structure, in the distribution of the nerves, and in the
manner in which they are acted on by various reagents. It should, also,
be especially observed that muscular contraction is accompanied by an
electrical discharge; and, as Dr. Radcliffe insists, “in the electrical
apparatus of the torpedo during rest, there would seem to be a charge
in every respect like that which is met with in muscle and nerve during
the rest, and the discharge of the torpedo, instead of being peculiar,
may be only another form of the discharge which attends upon the action
of muscle and motor nerve.” Beyond this we cannot at present go in the
way of explanation; but as we know so little about the uses of these
organs, and as we know nothing about the habits and structure of the
progenitors of the existing electric fishes, it would be extremely bold
to maintain that no serviceable transitions are possible by which these
organs might have been gradually developed.

These organs appear at first to offer another and far more serious
difficulty; for they occur in about a dozen kinds of fish, of which
several are widely remote in their affinities. When the same organ is
found in several members of the same class, especially if in members
having very different habits of life, we may generally attribute its
presence to inheritance from a common ancestor; and its absence in some
of the members to loss through disuse or natural selection. So that, if
the electric organs had been inherited from some one ancient
progenitor, we might have expected that all electric fishes would have
been specially related to each other; but this is far from the case.
Nor does geology at all lead to the belief that most fishes formerly
possessed electric organs, which their modified descendants have now
lost. But when we look at the subject more closely, we find in the
several fishes provided with electric organs, that these are situated
in different parts of the body, that they differ in construction, as in
the arrangement of the plates, and, according to Pacini, in the process
or means by which the electricity is excited—and lastly, in being
supplied with nerves proceeding from different sources, and this is
perhaps the most important of all the differences. Hence in the several
fishes furnished with electric organs, these cannot be considered as
homologous, but only as analogous in function. Consequently there is no
reason to suppose that they have been inherited from a common
progenitor; for had this been the case they would have closely
resembled each other in all respects. Thus the difficulty of an organ,
apparently the same, arising in several remotely allied species,
disappears, leaving only the lesser yet still great difficulty: namely,
by what graduated steps these organs have been developed in each
separate group of fishes.

The luminous organs which occur in a few insects, belonging to widely
different families, and which are situated in different parts of the
body, offer, under our present state of ignorance, a difficulty almost
exactly parallel with that of the electric organs. Other similar cases
could be given; for instance in plants, the very curious contrivance of
a mass of pollen-grains, borne on a foot-stalk with an adhesive gland,
is apparently the same in Orchis and Asclepias, genera almost as remote
as is possible among flowering plants; but here again the parts are not
homologous. In all cases of beings, far removed from each other in the
scale of organisation, which are furnished with similar and peculiar
organs, it will be found that although the general appearance and
function of the organs may be the same, yet fundamental differences
between them can always be detected. For instance, the eyes of
Cephalopods or cuttle-fish and of vertebrate animals appear wonderfully
alike; and in such widely sundered groups no part of this resemblance
can be due to inheritance from a common progenitor. Mr. Mivart has
advanced this case as one of special difficulty, but I am unable to see
the force of his argument. An organ for vision must be formed of
transparent tissue, and must include some sort of lens for throwing an
image at the back of a darkened chamber. Beyond this superficial
resemblance, there is hardly any real similarity between the eyes of
cuttle-fish and vertebrates, as may be seen by consulting Hensen’s
admirable memoir on these organs in the Cephalopoda. It is impossible
for me here to enter on details, but I may specify a few of the points
of difference. The crystalline lens in the higher cuttle-fish consists
of two parts, placed one behind the other like two lenses, both having
a very different structure and disposition to what occurs in the
vertebrata. The retina is wholly different, with an actual inversion of
the elemental parts, and with a large nervous ganglion included within
the membranes of the eye. The relations of the muscles are as different
as it is possible to conceive, and so in other points. Hence it is not
a little difficult to decide how far even the same terms ought to be
employed in describing the eyes of the Cephalopoda and Vertebrata. It
is, of course, open to any one to deny that the eye in either case
could have been developed through the natural selection of successive
slight variations; but if this be admitted in the one case it is
clearly possible in the other; and fundamental differences of structure
in the visual organs of two groups might have been anticipated, in
accordance with this view of their manner of formation. As two men have
sometimes independently hit on the same invention, so in the several
foregoing cases it appears that natural selection, working for the good
of each being, and taking advantage of all favourable variations, has
produced similar organs, as far as function is concerned, in distinct
organic beings, which owe none of their structure in common to
inheritance from a common progenitor.

Fritz Müller, in order to test the conclusions arrived at in this
volume, has followed out with much care a nearly similar line of
argument. Several families of crustaceans include a few species,
possessing an air-breathing apparatus and fitted to live out of the
water. In two of these families, which were more especially examined by
Müller, and which are nearly related to each other, the species agree
most closely in all important characters: namely in their sense organs,
circulating systems, in the position of the tufts of hair within their
complex stomachs, and lastly in the whole structure of the
water-breathing branchiæ, even to the microscopical hooks by which they
are cleansed. Hence it might have been expected that in the few species
belonging to both families which live on the land, the equally
important air-breathing apparatus would have been the same; for why
should this one apparatus, given for the same purpose, have been made
to differ, whilst all the other important organs were closely similar,
or rather, identical.

Fritz Müller argues that this close similarity in so many points of
structure must, in accordance with the views advanced by me, be
accounted for by inheritance from a common progenitor. But as the vast
majority of the species in the above two families, as well as most
other crustaceans, are aquatic in their habits, it is improbable in the
highest degree that their common progenitor should have been adapted
for breathing air. Müller was thus led carefully to examine the
apparatus in the air-breathing species; and he found it to differ in
each in several important points, as in the position of the orifices,
in the manner in which they are opened and closed, and in some
accessory details. Now such differences are intelligible, and might
even have been expected, on the supposition that species belonging to
distinct families had slowly become adapted to live more and more out
of water, and to breathe the air. For these species, from belonging to
distinct families, would have differed to a certain extent, and in
accordance with the principle that the nature of each variation depends
on two factors, viz., the nature of the organism and that of the
surrounding conditions, their variability assuredly would not have been
exactly the same. Consequently natural selection would have had
different materials or variations to work on, in order to arrive at the
same functional result; and the structures thus acquired would almost
necessarily have differed. On the hypothesis of separate acts of
creation the whole case remains unintelligible. This line of argument
seems to have had great weight in leading Fritz Müller to accept the
views maintained by me in this volume.

Another distinguished zoologist, the late Professor Claparède, has
argued in the same manner, and has arrived at the same result. He shows
that there are parasitic mites (Acaridæ), belonging to distinct
sub-families and families, which are furnished with hair-claspers.
These organs must have been independently developed, as they could not
have been inherited from a common progenitor; and in the several groups
they are formed by the modification of the fore legs, of the hind legs,
of the maxillæ or lips, and of appendages on the under side of the hind
part of the body.

In the foregoing cases, we see the same end gained and the same
function performed, in beings not at all or only remotely allied, by
organs in appearance, though not in development, closely similar. On
the other hand, it is a common rule throughout nature that the same end
should be gained, even sometimes in the case of closely related beings,
by the most diversified means. How differently constructed is the
feathered wing of a bird and the membrane-covered wing of a bat; and
still more so the four wings of a butterfly, the two wings of a fly,
and the two wings with the elytra of a beetle. Bivalve shells are made
to open and shut, but on what a number of patterns is the hinge
constructed, from the long row of neatly interlocking teeth in a Nucula
to the simple ligament of a Mussel! Seeds are disseminated by their
minuteness, by their capsule being converted into a light balloon-like
envelope, by being embedded in pulp or flesh, formed of the most
diverse parts, and rendered nutritious, as well as conspicuously
coloured, so as to attract and be devoured by birds, by having hooks
and grapnels of many kinds and serrated awns, so as to adhere to the
fur of quadrupeds, and by being furnished with wings and plumes, as
different in shape as they are elegant in structure, so as to be wafted
by every breeze. I will give one other instance: for this subject of
the same end being gained by the most diversified means well deserves
attention. Some authors maintain that organic beings have been formed
in many ways for the sake of mere variety, almost like toys in a shop,
but such a view of nature is incredible. With plants having separated
sexes, and with those in which, though hermaphrodites, the pollen does
not spontaneously fall on the stigma, some aid is necessary for their
fertilisation. With several kinds this is effected by the
pollen-grains, which are light and incoherent, being blown by the wind
through mere chance on to the stigma; and this is the simplest plan
which can well be conceived. An almost equally simple, though very
different plan occurs in many plants in which a symmetrical flower
secretes a few drops of nectar, and is consequently visited by insects;
and these carry the pollen from the anthers to the stigma.

From this simple stage we may pass through an inexhaustible number of
contrivances, all for the same purpose and effected in essentially the
same manner, but entailing changes in every part of the flower. The
nectar may be stored in variously shaped receptacles, with the stamens
and pistils modified in many ways, sometimes forming trap-like
contrivances, and sometimes capable of neatly adapted movements through
irritability or elasticity. From such structures we may advance till we
come to such a case of extraordinary adaptation as that lately
described by Dr. Crüger in the Coryanthes. This orchid has part of its
labellum or lower lip hollowed out into a great bucket, into which
drops of almost pure water continually fall from two secreting horns
which stand above it; and when the bucket is half-full, the water
overflows by a spout on one side. The basal part of the labellum stands
over the bucket, and is itself hollowed out into a sort of chamber with
two lateral entrances; within this chamber there are curious fleshy
ridges. The most ingenious man, if he had not witnessed what takes
place, could never have imagined what purpose all these parts serve.
But Dr. Crüger saw crowds of large humble-bees visiting the gigantic
flowers of this orchid, not in order to suck nectar, but to gnaw off
the ridges within the chamber above the bucket; in doing this they
frequently pushed each other into the bucket, and their wings being
thus wetted they could not fly away, but were compelled to crawl out
through the passage formed by the spout or overflow. Dr. Crüger saw a
“continual procession” of bees thus crawling out of their involuntary
bath. The passage is narrow, and is roofed over by the column, so that
a bee, in forcing its way out, first rubs its back against the viscid
stigma and then against the viscid glands of the pollen-masses. The
pollen-masses are thus glued to the back of the bee which first happens
to crawl out through the passage of a lately expanded flower, and are
thus carried away. Dr. Crüger sent me a flower in spirits of wine, with
a bee which he had killed before it had quite crawled out, with a
pollen-mass still fastened to its back. When the bee, thus provided,
flies to another flower, or to the same flower a second time, and is
pushed by its comrades into the bucket and then crawls out by the
passage, the pollen-mass necessarily comes first into contact with the
viscid stigma, and adheres to it, and the flower is fertilised. Now at
last we see the full use of every part of the flower, of the
water-secreting horns of the bucket half-full of water, which prevents
the bees from flying away, and forces them to crawl out through the
spout, and rub against the properly placed viscid pollen-masses and the
viscid stigma.

The construction of the flower in another closely allied orchid,
namely, the Catasetum, is widely different, though serving the same
end; and is equally curious. Bees visit these flowers, like those of
the Coryanthes, in order to gnaw the labellum; in doing this they
inevitably touch a long, tapering, sensitive projection, or, as I have
called it, the antenna. This antenna, when touched, transmits a
sensation or vibration to a certain membrane which is instantly
ruptured; this sets free a spring by which the pollen-mass is shot
forth, like an arrow, in the right direction, and adheres by its viscid
extremity to the back of the bee. The pollen-mass of the male plant
(for the sexes are separate in this orchid) is thus carried to the
flower of the female plant, where it is brought into contact with the
stigma, which is viscid enough to break certain elastic threads, and
retain the pollen, thus effecting fertilisation.

How, it may be asked, in the foregoing and in innumerable other
instances, can we understand the graduated scale of complexity and the
multifarious means for gaining the same end. The answer no doubt is, as
already remarked, that when two forms vary, which already differ from
each other in some slight degree, the variability will not be of the
same exact nature, and consequently the results obtained through
natural selection for the same general purpose will not be the same. We
should also bear in mind that every highly developed organism has
passed through many changes; and that each modified structure tends to
be inherited, so that each modification will not readily be quite lost,
but may be again and again further altered. Hence, the structure of
each part of each species, for whatever purpose it may serve, is the
sum of many inherited changes, through which the species has passed
during its successive adaptations to changed habits and conditions of
life.

Finally, then, although in many cases it is most difficult even to
conjecture by what transitions organs could have arrived at their
present state; yet, considering how small the proportion of living and
known forms is to the extinct and unknown, I have been astonished how
rarely an organ can be named, towards which no transitional grade is
known to lead. It is certainly true, that new organs appearing as if
created for some special purpose rarely or never appear in any being;
as indeed is shown by that old, but somewhat exaggerated, canon in
natural history of “Natura non facit saltum.” We meet with this
admission in the writings of almost every experienced naturalist; or,
as Milne Edwards has well expressed it, “Nature is prodigal in variety,
but niggard in innovation.” Why, on the theory of Creation, should
there be so much variety and so little real novelty? Why should all the
parts and organs of many independent beings, each supposed to have been
separately created for its own proper place in nature, be so commonly
linked together by graduated steps? Why should not Nature take a sudden
leap from structure to structure? On the theory of natural selection,
we can clearly understand why she should not; for natural selection
acts only by taking advantage of slight successive variations; she can
never take a great and sudden leap, but must advance by the short and
sure, though slow steps.

_Organs of little apparent Importance, as affected by Natural
Selection._

As natural selection acts by life and death, by the survival of the
fittest, and by the destruction of the less well-fitted individuals, I
have sometimes felt great difficulty in understanding the origin or
formation of parts of little importance; almost as great, though of a
very different kind, as in the case of the most perfect and complex
organs.

In the first place, we are much too ignorant in regard to the whole
economy of any one organic being to say what slight modifications would
be of importance or not. In a former chapter I have given instances of
very trifling characters, such as the down on fruit and the colour of
its flesh, the colour of the skin and hair of quadrupeds, which, from
being correlated with constitutional differences, or from determining
the attacks of insects, might assuredly be acted on by natural
selection. The tail of the giraffe looks like an artificially
constructed fly-flapper; and it seems at first incredible that this
could have been adapted for its present purpose by successive slight
modifications, each better and better fitted, for so trifling an object
as to drive away flies; yet we should pause before being too positive
even in this case, for we know that the distribution and existence of
cattle and other animals in South America absolutely depend on their
power of resisting the attacks of insects: so that individuals which
could by any means defend themselves from these small enemies, would be
able to range into new pastures and thus gain a great advantage. It is
not that the larger quadrupeds are actually destroyed (except in some
rare cases) by flies, but they are incessantly harassed and their
strength reduced, so that they are more subject to disease, or not so
well enabled in a coming dearth to search for food, or to escape from
beasts of prey.

Organs now of trifling importance have probably in some cases been of
high importance to an early progenitor, and, after having been slowly
perfected at a former period, have been transmitted to existing species
in nearly the same state, although now of very slight use; but any
actually injurious deviations in their structure would of course have
been checked by natural selection. Seeing how important an organ of
locomotion the tail is in most aquatic animals, its general presence
and use for many purposes in so many land animals, which in their lungs
or modified swim-bladders betray their aquatic origin, may perhaps be
thus accounted for. A well-developed tail having been formed in an
aquatic animal, it might subsequently come to be worked in for all
sorts of purposes, as a fly-flapper, an organ of prehension, or as an
aid in turning, as in the case of the dog, though the aid in this
latter respect must be slight, for the hare, with hardly any tail, can
double still more quickly.

In the second place, we may easily err in attributing importance to
characters, and in believing that they have been developed through
natural selection. We must by no means overlook the effects of the
definite action of changed conditions of life, of so-called spontaneous
variations, which seem to depend in a quite subordinate degree on the
nature of the conditions, of the tendency to reversion to long-lost
characters, of the complex laws of growth, such as of correlation,
comprehension, of the pressure of one part on another, &c., and finally
of sexual selection, by which characters of use to one sex are often
gained and then transmitted more or less perfectly to the other sex,
though of no use to the sex. But structures thus indirectly gained,
although at first of no advantage to a species, may subsequently have
been taken advantage of by its modified descendants, under new
conditions of life and newly acquired habits.

If green woodpeckers alone had existed, and we did not know that there
were many black and pied kinds, I dare say that we should have thought
that the green colour was a beautiful adaptation to conceal this
tree-frequenting bird from its enemies; and consequently that it was a
character of importance, and had been acquired through natural
selection; as it is, the colour is probably in chief part due to sexual
selection. A trailing palm in the Malay Archipelago climbs the loftiest
trees by the aid of exquisitely constructed hooks clustered around the
ends of the branches, and this contrivance, no doubt, is of the highest
service to the plant; but as we see nearly similar hooks on many trees
which are not climbers, and which, as there is reason to believe from
the distribution of the thorn-bearing species in Africa and South
America, serve as a defence against browsing quadrupeds, so the spikes
on the palm may at first have been developed for this object, and
subsequently have been improved and taken advantage of by the plant, as
it underwent further modification and became a climber. The naked skin
on the head of a vulture is generally considered as a direct adaptation
for wallowing in putridity; and so it may be, or it may possibly be due
to the direct action of putrid matter; but we should be very cautious
in drawing any such inference, when we see that the skin on the head of
the clean-feeding male turkey is likewise naked. The sutures in the
skulls of young mammals have been advanced as a beautiful adaptation
for aiding parturition, and no doubt they facilitate, or may be
indispensable for this act; but as sutures occur in the skulls of young
birds and reptiles, which have only to escape from a broken egg, we may
infer that this structure has arisen from the laws of growth, and has
been taken advantage of in the parturition of the higher animals.

We are profoundly ignorant of the cause of each slight variation or
individual difference; and we are immediately made conscious of this by
reflecting on the differences between the breeds of our domesticated
animals in different countries, more especially in the less civilized
countries, where there has been but little methodical selection.
Animals kept by savages in different countries often have to struggle
for their own subsistence, and are exposed to a certain extent to
natural selection, and individuals with slightly different
constitutions would succeed best under different climates. With cattle
susceptibility to the attacks of flies is correlated with colour, as is
the liability to be poisoned by certain plants; so that even colour
would be thus subjected to the action of natural selection. Some
observers are convinced that a damp climate affects the growth of the
hair, and that with the hair the horns are correlated. Mountain breeds
always differ from lowland breeds; and a mountainous country would
probably affect the hind limbs from exercising them more, and possibly
even the form of the pelvis; and then by the law of homologous
variation, the front limbs and the head would probably be affected. The
shape, also, of the pelvis might affect by pressure the shape of
certain parts of the young in the womb. The laborious breathing
necessary in high regions tends, as we have good reason to believe, to
increase the size of the chest; and again correlation would come into
play. The effects of lessened exercise, together with abundant food, on
the whole organisation is probably still more important, and this, as
H. von Nathusius has lately shown in his excellent Treatise, is
apparently one chief cause of the great modification which the breeds
of swine have undergone. But we are far too ignorant to speculate on
the relative importance of the several known and unknown causes of
variation; and I have made these remarks only to show that, if we are
unable to account for the characteristic differences of our several
domestic breeds, which nevertheless are generally admitted to have
arisen through ordinary generation from one or a few parent-stocks, we
ought not to lay too much stress on our ignorance of the precise cause
of the slight analogous differences between true species.

_Utilitarian Doctrine, how far true: Beauty, how acquired._

The foregoing remarks lead me to say a few words on the protest lately
made by some naturalists against the utilitarian doctrine that every
detail of structure has been produced for the good of its possessor.
They believe that many structures have been created for the sake of
beauty, to delight man or the Creator (but this latter point is beyond
the scope of scientific discussion), or for the sake of mere variety, a
view already discussed. Such doctrines, if true, would be absolutely
fatal to my theory. I fully admit that many structures are now of no
direct use to their possessors, and may never have been of any use to
their progenitors; but this does not prove that they were formed solely
for beauty or variety. No doubt the definite action of changed
conditions, and the various causes of modifications, lately specified,
have all produced an effect, probably a great effect, independently of
any advantage thus gained. But a still more important consideration is
that the chief part of the organisation of every living creature is due
to inheritance; and consequently, though each being assuredly is well
fitted for its place in nature, many structures have now no very close
and direct relation to present habits of life. Thus, we can hardly
believe that the webbed feet of the upland goose, or of the
frigate-bird, are of special use to these birds; we cannot believe that
the similar bones in the arm of the monkey, in the fore leg of the
horse, in the wing of the bat, and in the flipper of the seal, are of
special use to these animals. We may safely attribute these structures
to inheritance. But webbed feet no doubt were as useful to the
progenitor of the upland goose and of the frigate-bird, as they now are
to the most aquatic of living birds. So we may believe that the
progenitor of the seal did not possess a flipper, but a foot with five
toes fitted for walking or grasping; and we may further venture to
believe that the several bones in the limbs of the monkey, horse and
bat, were originally developed, on the principle of utility, probably
through the reduction of more numerous bones in the fin of some ancient
fish-like progenitor of the whole class. It is scarcely possible to
decide how much allowance ought to be made for such causes of change,
as the definite action of external conditions, so-called spontaneous
variations, and the complex laws of growth; but with these important
exceptions, we may conclude that the structure of every living creature
either now is, or was formerly, of some direct or indirect use to its
possessor.

With respect to the belief that organic beings have been created
beautiful for the delight of man—a belief which it has been pronounced
is subversive of my whole theory—I may first remark that the sense of
beauty obviously depends on the nature of the mind, irrespective of any
real quality in the admired object; and that the idea of what is
beautiful, is not innate or unalterable. We see this, for instance, in
the men of different races admiring an entirely different standard of
beauty in their women. If beautiful objects had been created solely for
man’s gratification, it ought to be shown that before man appeared
there was less beauty on the face of the earth than since he came on
the stage. Were the beautiful volute and cone shells of the Eocene
epoch, and the gracefully sculptured ammonites of the Secondary period,
created that man might ages afterwards admire them in his cabinet? Few
objects are more beautiful than the minute siliceous cases of the
diatomaceæ: were these created that they might be examined and admired
under the higher powers of the microscope? The beauty in this latter
case, and in many others, is apparently wholly due to symmetry of
growth. Flowers rank among the most beautiful productions of nature;
but they have been rendered conspicuous in contrast with the green
leaves, and in consequence at the same time beautiful, so that they may
be easily observed by insects. I have come to this conclusion from
finding it an invariable rule that when a flower is fertilised by the
wind it never has a gaily-coloured corolla. Several plants habitually
produce two kinds of flowers; one kind open and coloured so as to
attract insects; the other closed, not coloured, destitute of nectar,
and never visited by insects. Hence, we may conclude that, if insects
had not been developed on the face of the earth, our plants would not
have been decked with beautiful flowers, but would have produced only
such poor flowers as we see on our fir, oak, nut and ash trees, on
grasses, spinach, docks and nettles, which are all fertilised through
the agency of the wind. A similar line of argument holds good with
fruits; that a ripe strawberry or cherry is as pleasing to the eye as
to the palate—that the gaily-coloured fruit of the spindle-wood tree
and the scarlet berries of the holly are beautiful objects—will be
admitted by everyone. But this beauty serves merely as a guide to birds
and beasts, in order that the fruit may be devoured and the matured
seeds disseminated. I infer that this is the case from having as yet
found no exception to the rule that seeds are always thus disseminated
when embedded within a fruit of any kind (that is within a fleshy or
pulpy envelope), if it be coloured of any brilliant tint, or rendered
conspicuous by being white or black.

On the other hand, I willingly admit that a great number of male
animals, as all our most gorgeous birds, some fishes, reptiles, and
mammals, and a host of magnificently coloured butterflies, have been
rendered beautiful for beauty’s sake. But this has been effected
through sexual selection, that is, by the more beautiful males having
been continually preferred by the females, and not for the delight of
man. So it is with the music of birds. We may infer from all this that
a nearly similar taste for beautiful colours and for musical sounds
runs through a large part of the animal kingdom. When the female is as
beautifully coloured as the male, which is not rarely the case with
birds and butterflies, the cause apparently lies in the colours
acquired through sexual selection having been transmitted to both
sexes, instead of to the males alone. How the sense of beauty in its
simplest form—that is, the reception of a peculiar kind of pleasure
from certain colours, forms and sounds—was first developed in the mind
of man and of the lower animals, is a very obscure subject. The same
sort of difficulty is presented if we enquire how it is that certain
flavours and odours give pleasure, and others displeasure. Habit in all
these cases appears to have come to a certain extent into play; but
there must be some fundamental cause in the constitution of the nervous
system in each species.

Natural selection cannot possibly produce any modification in a species
exclusively for the good of another species; though throughout nature
one species incessantly takes advantage of, and profits by the
structures of others. But natural selection can and does often produce
structures for the direct injury of other animals, as we see in the
fang of the adder, and in the ovipositor of the ichneumon, by which its
eggs are deposited in the living bodies of other insects. If it could
be proved that any part of the structure of any one species had been
formed for the exclusive good of another species, it would annihilate
my theory, for such could not have been produced through natural
selection. Although many statements may be found in works on natural
history to this effect, I cannot find even one which seems to me of any
weight. It is admitted that the rattlesnake has a poison-fang for its
own defence and for the destruction of its prey; but some authors
suppose that at the same time it is furnished with a rattle for its own
injury, namely, to warn its prey. I would almost as soon believe that
the cat curls the end of its tail when preparing to spring, in order to
warn the doomed mouse. It is a much more probable view that the
rattlesnake uses its rattle, the cobra expands its frill and the
puff-adder swells while hissing so loudly and harshly, in order to
alarm the many birds and beasts which are known to attack even the most
venomous species. Snakes act on the same principle which makes the hen
ruffle her feathers and expand her wings when a dog approaches her
chickens. But I have not space here to enlarge on the many ways by
which animals endeavour to frighten away their enemies.

Natural selection will never produce in a being any structure more
injurious than beneficial to that being, for natural selection acts
solely by and for the good of each. No organ will be formed, as Paley
has remarked, for the purpose of causing pain or for doing an injury to
its possessor. If a fair balance be struck between the good and evil
caused by each part, each will be found on the whole advantageous.
After the lapse of time, under changing conditions of life, if any part
comes to be injurious, it will be modified; or if it be not so, the
being will become extinct, as myriads have become extinct.

Natural selection tends only to make each organic being as perfect as,
or slightly more perfect than the other inhabitants of the same country
with which it comes into competition. And we see that this is the
standard of perfection attained under nature. The endemic productions
of New Zealand, for instance, are perfect, one compared with another;
but they are now rapidly yielding before the advancing legions of
plants and animals introduced from Europe. Natural selection will not
produce absolute perfection, nor do we always meet, as far as we can
judge, with this high standard under nature. The correction for the
aberration of light is said by Müller not to be perfect even in that
most perfect organ, the human eye. Helmholtz, whose judgment no one
will dispute, after describing in the strongest terms the wonderful
powers of the human eye, adds these remarkable words: “That which we
have discovered in the way of inexactness and imperfection in the
optical machine and in the image on the retina, is as nothing in
comparison with the incongruities which we have just come across in the
domain of the sensations. One might say that nature has taken delight
in accumulating contradictions in order to remove all foundation from
the theory of a pre-existing harmony between the external and internal
worlds.” If our reason leads us to admire with enthusiasm a multitude
of inimitable contrivances in nature, this same reason tells us, though
we may easily err on both sides, that some other contrivances are less
perfect. Can we consider the sting of the bee as perfect, which, when
used against many kinds of enemies, cannot be withdrawn, owing to the
backward serratures, and thus inevitably causes the death of the insect
by tearing out its viscera?

If we look at the sting of the bee, as having existed in a remote
progenitor, as a boring and serrated instrument, like that in so many
members of the same great order, and that it has since been modified
but not perfected for its present purpose, with the poison originally
adapted for some other object, such as to produce galls, since
intensified, we can perhaps understand how it is that the use of the
sting should so often cause the insect’s own death: for if on the whole
the power of stinging be useful to the social community, it will fulfil
all the requirements of natural selection, though it may cause the
death of some few members. If we admire the truly wonderful power of
scent by which the males of many insects find their females, can we
admire the production for this single purpose of thousands of drones,
which are utterly useless to the community for any other purpose, and
which are ultimately slaughtered by their industrious and sterile
sisters? It may be difficult, but we ought to admire the savage
instinctive hatred of the queen-bee, which urges her to destroy the
young queens, her daughters, as soon as they are born, or to perish
herself in the combat; for undoubtedly this is for the good of the
community; and maternal love or maternal hatred, though the latter
fortunately is most rare, is all the same to the inexorable principles
of natural selection. If we admire the several ingenious contrivances
by which orchids and many other plants are fertilised through insect
agency, can we consider as equally perfect the elaboration of dense
clouds of pollen by our fir-trees, so that a few granules may be wafted
by chance on to the ovules?

_Summary: the Law of Unity of Type and of the Conditions of Existence
embraced by the Theory of Natural Selection._

We have in this chapter discussed some of the difficulties and
objections which may be urged against the theory. Many of them are
serious; but I think that in the discussion light has been thrown on
several facts, which on the belief of independent acts of creation are
utterly obscure. We have seen that species at any one period are not
indefinitely variable, and are not linked together by a multitude of
intermediate gradations, partly because the process of natural
selection is always very slow, and at any one time acts only on a few
forms; and partly because the very process of natural selection implies
the continual supplanting and extinction of preceding and intermediate
gradations. Closely allied species, now living on a continuous area,
must often have been formed when the area was not continuous, and when
the conditions of life did not insensibly graduate away from one part
to another. When two varieties are formed in two districts of a
continuous area, an intermediate variety will often be formed, fitted
for an intermediate zone; but from reasons assigned, the intermediate
variety will usually exist in lesser numbers than the two forms which
it connects; consequently the two latter, during the course of further
modification, from existing in greater numbers, will have a great
advantage over the less numerous intermediate variety, and will thus
generally succeed in supplanting and exterminating it.

We have seen in this chapter how cautious we should be in concluding
that the most different habits of life could not graduate into each
other; that a bat, for instance, could not have been formed by natural
selection from an animal which at first only glided through the air.

We have seen that a species under new conditions of life may change its
habits, or it may have diversified habits, with some very unlike those
of its nearest congeners. Hence we can understand, bearing in mind that
each organic being is trying to live wherever it can live, how it has
arisen that there are upland geese with webbed feet, ground
woodpeckers, diving thrushes, and petrels with the habits of auks.

Although the belief that an organ so perfect as the eye could have been
formed by natural selection, is enough to stagger any one; yet in the
case of any organ, if we know of a long series of gradations in
complexity, each good for its possessor, then under changing conditions
of life, there is no logical impossibility in the acquirement of any
conceivable degree of perfection through natural selection. In the
cases in which we know of no intermediate or transitional states, we
should be extremely cautious in concluding that none can have existed,
for the metamorphoses of many organs show what wonderful changes in
function are at least possible. For instance, a swim-bladder has
apparently been converted into an air-breathing lung. The same organ
having performed simultaneously very different functions, and then
having been in part or in whole specialised for one function; and two
distinct organs having performed at the same time the same function,
the one having been perfected whilst aided by the other, must often
have largely facilitated transitions.

We have seen that in two beings widely remote from each other in the
natural scale, organs serving for the same purpose and in external
appearance closely similar may have been separately and independently
formed; but when such organs are closely examined, essential
differences in their structure can almost always be detected; and this
naturally follows from the principle of natural selection. On the other
hand, the common rule throughout nature is infinite diversity of
structure for gaining the same end; and this again naturally follows
from the same great principle.

In many cases we are far too ignorant to be enabled to assert that a
part or organ is so unimportant for the welfare of a species, that
modifications in its structure could not have been slowly accumulated
by means of natural selection. In many other cases, modifications are
probably the direct result of the laws of variation or of growth,
independently of any good having been thus gained. But even such
structures have often, as we may feel assured, been subsequently taken
advantage of, and still further modified, for the good of species under
new conditions of life. We may, also, believe that a part formerly of
high importance has frequently been retained (as the tail of an aquatic
animal by its terrestrial descendants), though it has become of such
small importance that it could not, in its present state, have been
acquired by means of natural selection.

Natural selection can produce nothing in one species for the exclusive
good or injury of another; though it may well produce parts, organs,
and excretions highly useful or even indispensable, or highly injurious
to another species, but in all cases at the same time useful to the
possessor. In each well-stocked country natural selection acts through
the competition of the inhabitants and consequently leads to success in
the battle for life, only in accordance with the standard of that
particular country. Hence the inhabitants of one country, generally the
smaller one, often yield to the inhabitants of another and generally
the larger country. For in the larger country there will have existed
more individuals, and more diversified forms, and the competition will
have been severer, and thus the standard of perfection will have been
rendered higher. Natural selection will not necessarily lead to
absolute perfection; nor, as far as we can judge by our limited
faculties, can absolute perfection be everywhere predicated.

On the theory of natural selection we can clearly understand the full
meaning of that old canon in natural history, “Natura non facit
saltum.” This canon, if we look to the present inhabitants alone of the
world, is not strictly correct; but if we include all those of past
times, whether known or unknown, it must on this theory be strictly
true.

It is generally acknowledged that all organic beings have been formed
on two great laws—Unity of Type, and the Conditions of Existence. By
unity of type is meant that fundamental agreement in structure which we
see in organic beings of the same class, and which is quite independent
of their habits of life. On my theory, unity of type is explained by
unity of descent. The expression of conditions of existence, so often
insisted on by the illustrious Cuvier, is fully embraced by the
principle of natural selection. For natural selection acts by either
now adapting the varying parts of each being to its organic and
inorganic conditions of life; or by having adapted them during past
periods of time: the adaptations being aided in many cases by the
increased use or disuse of parts, being affected by the direct action
of external conditions of life, and subjected in all cases to the
several laws of growth and variation. Hence, in fact, the law of the
Conditions of Existence is the higher law; as it includes, through the
inheritance of former variations and adaptations, that of Unity of
Type.

CHAPTER VII.
MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTIONS TO THE THEORY OF NATURAL SELECTION.

Longevity—Modifications not necessarily simultaneous—Modifications
apparently of no direct service—Progressive development—Characters of
small functional importance, the most constant—Supposed incompetence of
natural selection to account for the incipient stages of useful
structures—Causes which interfere with the acquisition through natural
selection of useful structures—Gradations of structure with changed
functions—Widely different organs in members of the same class,
developed from one and the same source—Reasons for disbelieving in
great and abrupt modifications.

I will devote this chapter to the consideration of various
miscellaneous objections which have been advanced against my views, as
some of the previous discussions may thus be made clearer; but it would
be useless to discuss all of them, as many have been made by writers
who have not taken the trouble to understand the subject. Thus a
distinguished German naturalist has asserted that the weakest part of
my theory is, that I consider all organic beings as imperfect: what I
have really said is, that all are not as perfect as they might have
been in relation to their conditions; and this is shown to be the case
by so many native forms in many quarters of the world having yielded
their places to intruding foreigners. Nor can organic beings, even if
they were at any one time perfectly adapted to their conditions of
life, have remained so, when their conditions changed, unless they
themselves likewise changed; and no one will dispute that the physical
conditions of each country, as well as the number and kinds of its
inhabitants, have undergone many mutations.

A critic has lately insisted, with some parade of mathematical
accuracy, that longevity is a great advantage to all species, so that
he who believes in natural selection “must arrange his genealogical
tree” in such a manner that all the descendants have longer lives than
their progenitors! Cannot our critics conceive that a biennial plant or
one of the lower animals might range into a cold climate and perish
there every winter; and yet, owing to advantages gained through natural
selection, survive from year to year by means of its seeds or ova? Mr.
E. Ray Lankester has recently discussed this subject, and he concludes,
as far as its extreme complexity allows him to form a judgment, that
longevity is generally related to the standard of each species in the
scale of organisation, as well as to the amount of expenditure in
reproduction and in general activity. And these conditions have, it is
probable, been largely determined through natural selection.

It has been argued that, as none of the animals and plants of Egypt, of
which we know anything, have changed during the last three or four
thousand years, so probably have none in any part of the world. But, as
Mr. G.H. Lewes has remarked, this line of argument proves too much, for
the ancient domestic races figured on the Egyptian monuments, or
embalmed, are closely similar or even identical with those now living;
yet all naturalists admit that such races have been produced through
the modification of their original types. The many animals which have
remained unchanged since the commencement of the glacial period, would
have been an incomparably stronger case, for these have been exposed to
great changes of climate and have migrated over great distances;
whereas, in Egypt, during the last several thousand years, the
conditions of life, as far as we know, have remained absolutely
uniform. The fact of little or no modification having been effected
since the glacial period, would have been of some avail against those
who believe in an innate and necessary law of development, but is
powerless against the doctrine of natural selection or the survival of
the fittest, which implies that when variations or individual
differences of a beneficial nature happen to arise, these will be
preserved; but this will be effected only under certain favourable
circumstances.

The celebrated palæontologist, Bronn, at the close of his German
translation of this work, asks how, on the principle of natural
selection, can a variety live side by side with the parent species? If
both have become fitted for slightly different habits of life or
conditions, they might live together; and if we lay on one side
polymorphic species, in which the variability seems to be of a peculiar
nature, and all mere temporary variations, such as size, albinism, &c.,
the more permanent varieties are generally found, as far as I can
discover, inhabiting distinct stations, such as high land or low land,
dry or moist districts. Moreover, in the case of animals which wander
much about and cross freely, their varieties seem to be generally
confined to distinct regions.

Bronn also insists that distinct species never differ from each other
in single characters, but in many parts; and he asks, how it always
comes that many parts of the organisation should have been modified at
the same time through variation and natural selection? But there is no
necessity for supposing that all the parts of any being have been
simultaneously modified. The most striking modifications, excellently
adapted for some purpose, might, as was formerly remarked, be acquired
by successive variations, if slight, first in one part and then in
another; and as they would be transmitted all together, they would
appear to us as if they had been simultaneously developed. The best
answer, however, to the above objection is afforded by those domestic
races which have been modified, chiefly through man’s power of
selection, for some special purpose. Look at the race and dray-horse,
or at the greyhound and mastiff. Their whole frames, and even their
mental characteristics, have been modified; but if we could trace each
step in the history of their transformation—and the latter steps can be
traced—we should not see great and simultaneous changes, but first one
part and then another slightly modified and improved. Even when
selection has been applied by man to some one character alone—of which
our cultivated plants offer the best instances—it will invariably be
found that although this one part, whether it be the flower, fruit, or
leaves, has been greatly changed, almost all the other parts have been
slightly modified. This may be attributed partly to the principle of
correlated growth, and partly to so-called spontaneous variation.

A much more serious objection has been urged by Bronn, and recently by
Broca, namely, that many characters appear to be of no service whatever
to their possessors, and therefore cannot have been influenced through
natural selection. Bronn adduces the length of the ears and tails in
the different species of hares and mice—the complex folds of enamel in
the teeth of many animals, and a multitude of analogous cases. With
respect to plants, this subject has been discussed by Nägeli in an
admirable essay. He admits that natural selection has effected much,
but he insists that the families of plants differ chiefly from each
other in morphological characters, which appear to be quite unimportant
for the welfare of the species. He consequently believes in an innate
tendency towards progressive and more perfect development. He specifies
the arrangement of the cells in the tissues, and of the leaves on the
axis, as cases in which natural selection could not have acted. To
these may be added the numerical divisions in the parts of the flower,
the position of the ovules, the shape of the seed, when not of any use
for dissemination, &c.

There is much force in the above objection. Nevertheless, we ought, in
the first place, to be extremely cautious in pretending to decide what
structures now are, or have formerly been, of use to each species. In
the second place, it should always be borne in mind that when one part
is modified, so will be other parts, through certain dimly seen causes,
such as an increased or diminished flow of nutriment to a part, mutual
pressure, an early developed part affecting one subsequently developed,
and so forth—as well as through other causes which lead to the many
mysterious cases of correlation, which we do not in the least
understand. These agencies may be all grouped together, for the sake of
brevity, under the expression of the laws of growth. In the third
place, we have to allow for the direct and definite action of changed
conditions of life, and for so-called spontaneous variations, in which
the nature of the conditions apparently plays a quite subordinate part.
Bud-variations, such as the appearance of a moss-rose on a common rose,
or of a nectarine on a peach-tree, offer good instances of spontaneous
variations; but even in these cases, if we bear in mind the power of a
minute drop of poison in producing complex galls, we ought not to feel
too sure that the above variations are not the effect of some local
change in the nature of the sap, due to some change in the conditions.
There must be some efficient cause for each slight individual
difference, as well as for more strongly marked variations which
occasionally arise; and if the unknown cause were to act persistently,
it is almost certain that all the individuals of the species would be
similarly modified.

In the earlier editions of this work I underrated, as it now seems
probable, the frequency and importance of modifications due to
spontaneous variability. But it is impossible to attribute to this
cause the innumerable structures which are so well adapted to the
habits of life of each species. I can no more believe in this than that
the well-adapted form of a race-horse or greyhound, which before the
principle of selection by man was well understood, excited so much
surprise in the minds of the older naturalists, can thus be explained.

It may be worth while to illustrate some of the foregoing remarks. With
respect to the assumed inutility of various parts and organs, it is
hardly necessary to observe that even in the higher and best-known
animals many structures exist, which are so highly developed that no
one doubts that they are of importance, yet their use has not been, or
has only recently been, ascertained. As Bronn gives the length of the
ears and tail in the several species of mice as instances, though
trifling ones, of differences in structure which can be of no special
use, I may mention that, according to Dr. Schöbl, the external ears of
the common mouse are supplied in an extraordinary manner with nerves,
so that they no doubt serve as tactile organs; hence the length of the
ears can hardly be quite unimportant. We shall, also, presently see
that the tail is a highly useful prehensile organ to some of the
species; and its use would be much influence by its length.

With respect to plants, to which on account of Nägeli’s essay I shall
confine myself in the following remarks, it will be admitted that the
flowers of the orchids present a multitude of curious structures, which
a few years ago would have been considered as mere morphological
differences without any special function; but they are now known to be
of the highest importance for the fertilisation of the species through
the aid of insects, and have probably been gained through natural
selection. No one until lately would have imagined that in dimorphic
and trimorphic plants the different lengths of the stamens and pistils,
and their arrangement, could have been of any service, but now we know
this to be the case.

In certain whole groups of plants the ovules stand erect, and in others
they are suspended; and within the same ovarium of some few plants, one
ovule holds the former and a second ovule the latter position. These
positions seem at first purely morphological, or of no physiological
signification; but Dr. Hooker informs me that within the same ovarium
the upper ovules alone in some cases, and in others the lower ones
alone are fertilised; and he suggests that this probably depends on the
direction in which the pollen-tubes enter the ovarium. If so, the
position of the ovules, even when one is erect and the other suspended
within the same ovarium, would follow the selection of any slight
deviations in position which favoured their fertilisation, and the
production of seed.

Several plants belonging to distinct orders habitually produce flowers
of two kinds—the one open, of the ordinary structure, the other closed
and imperfect. These two kinds of flowers sometimes differ wonderfully
in structure, yet may be seen to graduate into each other on the same
plant. The ordinary and open flowers can be intercrossed; and the
benefits which certainly are derived from this process are thus
secured. The closed and imperfect flowers are, however, manifestly of
high importance, as they yield with the utmost safety a large stock of
seed, with the expenditure of wonderfully little pollen. The two kinds
of flowers often differ much, as just stated, in structure. The petals
in the imperfect flowers almost always consist of mere rudiments, and
the pollen-grains are reduced in diameter. In Ononis columnæ five of
the alternate stamens are rudimentary; and in some species of Viola
three stamens are in this state, two retaining their proper function,
but being of very small size. In six out of thirty of the closed
flowers in an Indian violet (name unknown, for the plants have never
produced with me perfect flowers), the sepals are reduced from the
normal number of five to three. In one section of the Malpighiaceæ the
closed flowers, according to A. de Jussieu, are still further modified,
for the five stamens which stand opposite to the sepals are all
aborted, a sixth stamen standing opposite to a petal being alone
developed; and this stamen is not present in the ordinary flowers of
this species; the style is aborted; and the ovaria are reduced from
three to two. Now although natural selection may well have had the
power to prevent some of the flowers from expanding, and to reduce the
amount of pollen, when rendered by the closure of the flowers
superfluous, yet hardly any of the above special modifications can have
been thus determined, but must have followed from the laws of growth,
including the functional inactivity of parts, during the progress of
the reduction of the pollen and the closure of the flowers.

It is so necessary to appreciate the important effects of the laws of
growth, that I will give some additional cases of another kind, namely
of differences in the same part or organ, due to differences in
relative position on the same plant. In the Spanish chestnut, and in
certain fir-trees, the angles of divergence of the leaves differ,
according to Schacht, in the nearly horizontal and in the upright
branches. In the common rue and some other plants, one flower, usually
the central or terminal one, opens first, and has five sepals and
petals, and five divisions to the ovarium; while all the other flowers
on the plant are tetramerous. In the British Adoxa the uppermost flower
generally has two calyx-lobes with the other organs tetramerous, while
the surrounding flowers generally have three calyx-lobes with the other
organs pentamerous. In many Compositæ and Umbelliferæ (and in some
other plants) the circumferential flowers have their corollas much more
developed than those of the centre; and this seems often connected with
the abortion of the reproductive organs. It is a more curious fact,
previously referred to, that the achenes or seeds of the circumference
and centre sometimes differ greatly in form, colour and other
characters. In Carthamus and some other Compositæ the central achenes
alone are furnished with a pappus; and in Hyoseris the same head yields
achenes of three different forms. In certain Umbelliferæ the exterior
seeds, according to Tausch, are orthospermous, and the central one
cœlospermous, and this is a character which was considered by De
Candolle to be in other species of the highest systematic importance.
Professor Braun mentions a Fumariaceous genus, in which the flowers in
the lower part of the spike bear oval, ribbed, one-seeded nutlets; and
in the upper part of the spike, lanceolate, two-valved and two-seeded
siliques. In these several cases, with the exception of that of the
well-developed ray-florets, which are of service in making the flowers
conspicuous to insects, natural selection cannot, as far as we can
judge, have come into play, or only in a quite subordinate manner. All
these modifications follow from the relative position and inter-action
of the parts; and it can hardly be doubted that if all the flowers and
leaves on the same plant had been subjected to the same external and
internal condition, as are the flowers and leaves in certain positions,
all would have been modified in the same manner.

In numerous other cases we find modifications of structure, which are
considered by botanists to be generally of a highly important nature,
affecting only some of the flowers on the same plant, or occurring on
distinct plants, which grow close together under the same conditions.
As these variations seem of no special use to the plants, they cannot
have been influenced by natural selection. Of their cause we are quite
ignorant; we cannot even attribute them, as in the last class of cases,
to any proximate agency, such as relative position. I will give only a
few instances. It is so common to observe on the same plant, flowers
indifferently tetramerous, pentamerous, &c., that I need not give
examples; but as numerical variations are comparatively rare when the
parts are few, I may mention that, according to De Candolle, the
flowers of Papaver bracteatum offer either two sepals with four petals
(which is the common type with poppies), or three sepals with six
petals. The manner in which the petals are folded in the bud is in most
groups a very constant morphological character; but Professor Asa Gray
states that with some species of Mimulus, the æstivation is almost as
frequently that of the Rhinanthideæ as of the Antirrhinideæ, to which
latter tribe the genus belongs. Aug. St. Hilaire gives the following
cases: the genus Zanthoxylon belongs to a division of the Rutaceæ with
a single ovary, but in some species flowers may be found on the same
plant, and even in the same panicle, with either one or two ovaries. In
Helianthemum the capsule has been described as unilocular or
tri-locular; and in H. mutabile, “Une lame _plus ou moins large_,
s’étend entre le pericarpe et le placenta.” In the flowers of Saponaria
officinalis Dr. Masters has observed instances of both marginal and
free central placentation. Lastly, St. Hilaire found towards the
southern extreme of the range of Gomphia oleæformis two forms which he
did not at first doubt were distinct species, but he subsequently saw
them growing on the same bush; and he then adds, “Voilà donc dans un
même individu des loges et un style qui se rattachent tantôt à un axe
verticale et tantôt à un gynobase.”

We thus see that with plants many morphological changes may be
attributed to the laws of growth and the inter-action of parts,
independently of natural selection. But with respect to Nägeli’s
doctrine of an innate tendency towards perfection or progressive
development, can it be said in the case of these strongly pronounced
variations, that the plants have been caught in the act of progressing
towards a higher state of development? On the contrary, I should infer
from the mere fact of the parts in question differing or varying
greatly on the same plant, that such modifications were of extremely
small importance to the plants themselves, of whatever importance they
may generally be to us for our classifications. The acquisition of a
useless part can hardly be said to raise an organism in the natural
scale; and in the case of the imperfect, closed flowers, above
described, if any new principle has to be invoked, it must be one of
retrogression rather than of progression; and so it must be with many
parasitic and degraded animals. We are ignorant of the exciting cause
of the above specified modifications; but if the unknown cause were to
act almost uniformly for a length of time, we may infer that the result
would be almost uniform; and in this case all the individuals of the
species would be modified in the same manner.

From the fact of the above characters being unimportant for the welfare
of the species, any slight variations which occurred in them would not
have been accumulated and augmented through natural selection. A
structure which has been developed through long-continued selection,
when it ceases to be of service to a species, generally becomes
variable, as we see with rudimentary organs; for it will no longer be
regulated by this same power of selection. But when, from the nature of
the organism and of the conditions, modifications have been induced
which are unimportant for the welfare of the species, they may be, and
apparently often have been, transmitted in nearly the same state to
numerous, otherwise modified, descendants. It cannot have been of much
importance to the greater number of mammals, birds, or reptiles,
whether they were clothed with hair, feathers or scales; yet hair has
been transmitted to almost all mammals, feathers to all birds, and
scales to all true reptiles. A structure, whatever it may be, which is
common to many allied forms, is ranked by us as of high systematic
importance, and consequently is often assumed to be of high vital
importance to the species. Thus, as I am inclined to believe,
morphological differences, which we consider as important—such as the
arrangement of the leaves, the divisions of the flower or of the
ovarium, the position of the ovules, &c., first appeared in many cases
as fluctuating variations, which sooner or later became constant
through the nature of the organism and of the surrounding conditions,
as well as through the intercrossing of distinct individuals, but not
through natural selection; for as these morphological characters do not
affect the welfare of the species, any slight deviations in them could
not have been governed or accumulated through this latter agency. It is
a strange result which we thus arrive at, namely, that characters of
slight vital importance to the species, are the most important to the
systematist; but, as we shall hereafter see when we treat of the
genetic principle of classification, this is by no means so paradoxical
as it may at first appear.

Although we have no good evidence of the existence in organic beings of
an innate tendency towards progressive development, yet this
necessarily follows, as I have attempted to show in the fourth chapter,
through the continued action of natural selection. For the best
definition which has ever been given of a high standard of
organisation, is the degree to which the parts have been specialised or
differentiated; and natural selection tends towards this end, inasmuch
as the parts are thus enabled to perform their functions more
efficiently.

A distinguished zoologist, Mr. St. George Mivart, has recently
collected all the objections which have ever been advanced by myself
and others against the theory of natural selection, as propounded by
Mr. Wallace and myself, and has illustrated them with admirable art and
force. When thus marshalled, they make a formidable array; and as it
forms no part of Mr. Mivart’s plan to give the various facts and
considerations opposed to his conclusions, no slight effort of reason
and memory is left to the reader, who may wish to weigh the evidence on
both sides. When discussing special cases, Mr. Mivart passes over the
effects of the increased use and disuse of parts, which I have always
maintained to be highly important, and have treated in my “Variation
under Domestication” at greater length than, as I believe, any other
writer. He likewise often assumes that I attribute nothing to
variation, independently of natural selection, whereas in the work just
referred to I have collected a greater number of well-established cases
than can be found in any other work known to me. My judgment may not be
trustworthy, but after reading with care Mr. Mivart’s book, and
comparing each section with what I have said on the same head, I never
before felt so strongly convinced of the general truth of the
conclusions here arrived at, subject, of course, in so intricate a
subject, to much partial error.

All Mr. Mivart’s objections will be, or have been, considered in the
present volume. The one new point which appears to have struck many
readers is, “That natural selection is incompetent to account for the
incipient stages of useful structures.” This subject is intimately
connected with that of the gradation of the characters, often
accompanied by a change of function, for instance, the conversion of a
swim-bladder into lungs, points which were discussed in the last
chapter under two headings. Nevertheless, I will here consider in some
detail several of the cases advanced by Mr. Mivart, selecting those
which are the most illustrative, as want of space prevents me from
considering all.

The giraffe, by its lofty stature, much elongated neck, fore legs, head
and tongue, has its whole frame beautifully adapted for browsing on the
higher branches of trees. It can thus obtain food beyond the reach of
the other Ungulata or hoofed animals inhabiting the same country; and
this must be a great advantage to it during dearths. The Niata cattle
in South America show us how small a difference in structure may make,
during such periods, a great difference in preserving an animal’s life.
These cattle can browse as well as others on grass, but from the
projection of the lower jaw they cannot, during the often recurrent
droughts, browse on the twigs of trees, reeds, &c., to which food the
common cattle and horses are then driven; so that at these times the
Niatas perish, if not fed by their owners. Before coming to Mr.
Mivart’s objections, it may be well to explain once again how natural
selection will act in all ordinary cases. Man has modified some of his
animals, without necessarily having attended to special points of
structure, by simply preserving and breeding from the fleetest
individuals, as with the race-horse and greyhound, or as with the
game-cock, by breeding from the victorious birds. So under nature with
the nascent giraffe, the individuals which were the highest browsers
and were able during dearths to reach even an inch or two above the
others, will often have been preserved; for they will have roamed over
the whole country in search of food. That the individuals of the same
species often differ slightly in the relative lengths of all their
parts may be seen in many works of natural history, in which careful
measurements are given. These slight proportional differences, due to
the laws of growth and variation, are not of the slightest use or
importance to most species. But it will have been otherwise with the
nascent giraffe, considering its probable habits of life; for those
individuals which had some one part or several parts of their bodies
rather more elongated than usual, would generally have survived. These
will have intercrossed and left offspring, either inheriting the same
bodily peculiarities, or with a tendency to vary again in the same
manner; while the individuals less favoured in the same respects will
have been the most liable to perish.

We here see that there is no need to separate single pairs, as man
does, when he methodically improves a breed: natural selection will
preserve and thus separate all the superior individuals, allowing them
freely to intercross, and will destroy all the inferior individuals. By
this process long-continued, which exactly corresponds with what I have
called unconscious selection by man, combined, no doubt, in a most
important manner with the inherited effects of the increased use of
parts, it seems to me almost certain that an ordinary hoofed quadruped
might be converted into a giraffe.

To this conclusion Mr. Mivart brings forward two objections. One is
that the increased size of the body would obviously require an
increased supply of food, and he considers it as “very problematical
whether the disadvantages thence arising would not, in times of
scarcity, more than counterbalance the advantages.” But as the giraffe
does actually exist in large numbers in Africa, and as some of the
largest antelopes in the world, taller than an ox, abound there, why
should we doubt that, as far as size is concerned, intermediate
gradations could formerly have existed there, subjected as now to
severe dearths. Assuredly the being able to reach, at each stage of
increased size, to a supply of food, left untouched by the other hoofed
quadrupeds of the country, would have been of some advantage to the
nascent giraffe. Nor must we overlook the fact, that increased bulk
would act as a protection against almost all beasts of prey excepting
the lion; and against this animal, its tall neck—and the taller the
better—would, as Mr. Chauncey Wright has remarked, serve as a
watch-tower. It is from this cause, as Sir S. Baker remarks, that no
animal is more difficult to stalk than the giraffe. This animal also
uses its long neck as a means of offence or defence, by violently
swinging its head armed with stump-like horns. The preservation of each
species can rarely be determined by any one advantage, but by the union
of all, great and small.

Mr. Mivart then asks (and this is his second objection), if natural
selection be so potent, and if high browsing be so great an advantage,
why has not any other hoofed quadruped acquired a long neck and lofty
stature, besides the giraffe, and, in a lesser degree, the camel,
guanaco and macrauchenia? Or, again, why has not any member of the
group acquired a long proboscis? With respect to South Africa, which
was formerly inhabited by numerous herds of the giraffe, the answer is
not difficult, and can best be given by an illustration. In every
meadow in England, in which trees grow, we see the lower branches
trimmed or planed to an exact level by the browsing of the horses or
cattle; and what advantage would it be, for instance, to sheep, if kept
there, to acquire slightly longer necks? In every district some one
kind of animal will almost certainly be able to browse higher than the
others; and it is almost equally certain that this one kind alone could
have its neck elongated for this purpose, through natural selection and
the effects of increased use. In South Africa the competition for
browsing on the higher branches of the acacias and other trees must be
between giraffe and giraffe, and not with the other ungulate animals.

Why, in other quarters of the world, various animals belonging to this
same order have not acquired either an elongated neck or a proboscis,
cannot be distinctly answered; but it is as unreasonable to expect a
distinct answer to such a question as why some event in the history of
mankind did not occur in one country while it did in another. We are
ignorant with respect to the conditions which determine the numbers and
range of each species, and we cannot even conjecture what changes of
structure would be favourable to its increase in some new country. We
can, however, see in a general manner that various causes might have
interfered with the development of a long neck or proboscis. To reach
the foliage at a considerable height (without climbing, for which
hoofed animals are singularly ill-constructed) implies greatly
increased bulk of body; and we know that some areas support singularly
few large quadrupeds, for instance South America, though it is so
luxuriant, while South Africa abounds with them to an unparalleled
degree. Why this should be so we do not know; nor why the later
tertiary periods should have been much more favourable for their
existence than the present time. Whatever the causes may have been, we
can see that certain districts and times would have been much more
favourable than others for the development of so large a quadruped as
the giraffe.

In order that an animal should acquire some structure specially and
largely developed, it is almost indispensable that several other parts
should be modified and coadapted. Although every part of the body
varies slightly, it does not follow that the necessary parts should
always vary in the right direction and to the right degree. With the
different species of our domesticated animals we know that the parts
vary in a different manner and degree, and that some species are much
more variable than others. Even if the fitting variations did arise, it
does not follow that natural selection would be able to act on them and
produce a structure which apparently would be beneficial to the
species. For instance, if the number of individuals existing in a
country is determined chiefly through destruction by beasts of prey—by
external or internal parasites, &c.—as seems often to be the case, then
natural selection will be able to do little, or will be greatly
retarded, in modifying any particular structure for obtaining food.
Lastly, natural selection is a slow process, and the same favourable
conditions must long endure in order that any marked effect should thus
be produced. Except by assigning such general and vague reasons, we
cannot explain why, in many quarters of the world, hoofed quadrupeds
have not acquired much elongated necks or other means for browsing on
the higher branches of trees.

Objections of the same nature as the foregoing have been advanced by
many writers. In each case various causes, besides the general ones
just indicated, have probably interfered with the acquisition through
natural selection of structures, which it is thought would be
beneficial to certain species. One writer asks, why has not the ostrich
acquired the power of flight? But a moment’s reflection will show what
an enormous supply of food would be necessary to give to this bird of
the desert force to move its huge body through the air. Oceanic islands
are inhabited by bats and seals, but by no terrestrial mammals; yet as
some of these bats are peculiar species, they must have long inhabited
their present homes. Therefore Sir C. Lyell asks, and assigns certain
reasons in answer, why have not seals and bats given birth on such
islands to forms fitted to live on the land? But seals would
necessarily be first converted into terrestrial carnivorous animals of
considerable size, and bats into terrestrial insectivorous animals; for
the former there would be no prey; for the bats ground-insects would
serve as food, but these would already be largely preyed on by the
reptiles or birds, which first colonise and abound on most oceanic
islands. Gradations of structure, with each stage beneficial to a
changing species, will be favoured only under certain peculiar
conditions. A strictly terrestrial animal, by occasionally hunting for
food in shallow water, then in streams or lakes, might at last be
converted into an animal so thoroughly aquatic as to brave the open
ocean. But seals would not find on oceanic islands the conditions
favourable to their gradual reconversion into a terrestrial form. Bats,
as formerly shown, probably acquired their wings by at first gliding
through the air from tree to tree, like the so-called flying-squirrels,
for the sake of escaping from their enemies, or for avoiding falls; but
when the power of true flight had once been acquired, it would never be
reconverted back, at least for the above purposes, into the less
efficient power of gliding through the air. Bats, might, indeed, like
many birds, have had their wings greatly reduced in size, or completely
lost, through disuse; but in this case it would be necessary that they
should first have acquired the power of running quickly on the ground,
by the aid of their hind legs alone, so as to compete with birds or
other ground animals; and for such a change a bat seems singularly
ill-fitted. These conjectural remarks have been made merely to show
that a transition of structure, with each step beneficial, is a highly
complex affair; and that there is nothing strange in a transition not
having occurred in any particular case.

Lastly, more than one writer has asked why have some animals had their
mental powers more highly developed than others, as such development
would be advantageous to all? Why have not apes acquired the
intellectual powers of man? Various causes could be assigned; but as
they are conjectural, and their relative probability cannot be weighed,
it would be useless to give them. A definite answer to the latter
question ought not to be expected, seeing that no one can solve the
simpler problem, why, of two races of savages, one has risen higher in
the scale of civilisation than the other; and this apparently implies
increased brain power.

We will return to Mr. Mivart’s other objections. Insects often resemble
for the sake of protection various objects, such as green or decayed
leaves, dead twigs, bits of lichen, flowers, spines, excrement of
birds, and living insects; but to this latter point I shall hereafter
recur. The resemblance is often wonderfully close, and is not confined
to colour, but extends to form, and even to the manner in which the
insects hold themselves. The caterpillars which project motionless like
dead twigs from the bushes on which they feed, offer an excellent
instance of a resemblance of this kind. The cases of the imitation of
such objects as the excrement of birds, are rare and exceptional. On
this head, Mr. Mivart remarks, “As, according to Mr. Darwin’s theory,
there is a constant tendency to indefinite variation, and as the minute
incipient variations will be in _all directions_, they must tend to
neutralize each other, and at first to form such unstable modifications
that it is difficult, if not impossible, to see how such indefinite
oscillations of infinitesimal beginnings can ever build up a
sufficiently appreciable resemblance to a leaf, bamboo, or other
object, for natural selection to seize upon and perpetuate.”

But in all the foregoing cases the insects in their original state no
doubt presented some rude and accidental resemblance to an object
commonly found in the stations frequented by them. Nor is this at all
improbable, considering the almost infinite number of surrounding
objects and the diversity in form and colour of the hosts of insects
which exist. As some rude resemblance is necessary for the first start,
we can understand how it is that the larger and higher animals do not
(with the exception, as far as I know, of one fish) resemble for the
sake of protection special objects, but only the surface which commonly
surrounds them, and this chiefly in colour. Assuming that an insect
originally happened to resemble in some degree a dead twig or a decayed
leaf, and that it varied slightly in many ways, then all the variations
which rendered the insect at all more like any such object, and thus
favoured its escape, would be preserved, while other variations would
be neglected and ultimately lost; or, if they rendered the insect at
all less like the imitated object, they would be eliminated. There
would indeed be force in Mr. Mivart’s objection, if we were to attempt
to account for the above resemblances, independently of natural
selection, through mere fluctuating variability; but as the case stands
there is none.

Nor can I see any force in Mr. Mivart’s difficulty with respect to “the
last touches of perfection in the mimicry;” as in the case given by Mr.
Wallace, of a walking-stick insect (Ceroxylus laceratus), which
resembles “a stick grown over by a creeping moss or jungermannia.” So
close was this resemblance, that a native Dyak maintained that the
foliaceous excrescences were really moss. Insects are preyed on by
birds and other enemies whose sight is probably sharper than ours, and
every grade in resemblance which aided an insect to escape notice or
detection, would tend towards its preservation; and the more perfect
the resemblance so much the better for the insect. Considering the
nature of the differences between the species in the group which
includes the above Ceroxylus, there is nothing improbable in this
insect having varied in the irregularities on its surface, and in these
having become more or less green-coloured; for in every group the
characters which differ in the several species are the most apt to
vary, while the generic characters, or those common to all the species,
are the most constant.

The Greenland whale is one of the most wonderful animals in the world,
and the baleen, or whalebone, one of its greatest peculiarities. The
baleen consists of a row, on each side of the upper jaw, of about 300
plates or laminæ, which stand close together transversely to the longer
axis of the mouth. Within the main row there are some subsidiary rows.
The extremities and inner margins of all the plates are frayed into
stiff bristles, which clothe the whole gigantic palate, and serve to
strain or sift the water, and thus to secure the minute prey on which
these great animals subsist. The middle and longest lamina in the
Greenland whale is ten, twelve, or even fifteen feet in length; but in
the different species of Cetaceans there are gradations in length; the
middle lamina being in one species, according to Scoresby, four feet,
in another three, in another eighteen inches, and in the Balænoptera
rostrata only about nine inches in length. The quality of the whalebone
also differs in the different species.

With respect to the baleen, Mr. Mivart remarks that if it “had once
attained such a size and development as to be at all useful, then its
preservation and augmentation within serviceable limits would be
promoted by natural selection alone. But how to obtain the beginning of
such useful development?” In answer, it may be asked, why should not
the early progenitors of the whales with baleen have possessed a mouth
constructed something like the lamellated beak of a duck? Ducks, like
whales, subsist by sifting the mud and water; and the family has
sometimes been called _Criblatores_, or sifters. I hope that I may not
be misconstrued into saying that the progenitors of whales did actually
possess mouths lamellated like the beak of a duck. I wish only to show
that this is not incredible, and that the immense plates of baleen in
the Greenland whale might have been developed from such lamellæ by
finely graduated steps, each of service to its possessor.

The beak of a shoveller-duck (Spatula clypeata) is a more beautiful and
complex structure than the mouth of a whale. The upper mandible is
furnished on each side (in the specimen examined by me) with a row or
comb formed of 188 thin, elastic lamellæ, obliquely bevelled so as to
be pointed, and placed transversely to the longer axis of the mouth.
They arise from the palate, and are attached by flexible membrane to
the sides of the mandible. Those standing towards the middle are the
longest, being about one-third of an inch in length, and they project
fourteen one-hundredths of an inch beneath the edge. At their bases
there is a short subsidiary row of obliquely transverse lamellæ. In
these several respects they resemble the plates of baleen in the mouth
of a whale. But towards the extremity of the beak they differ much, as
they project inward, instead of straight downward. The entire head of
the shoveller, though incomparably less bulky, is about one-eighteenth
of the length of the head of a moderately large Balænoptera rostrata,
in which species the baleen is only nine inches long; so that if we
were to make the head of the shoveller as long as that of the
Balænoptera, the lamellæ would be six inches in length, that is,
two-thirds of the length of the baleen in this species of whale. The
lower mandible of the shoveller-duck is furnished with lamellæ of equal
length with these above, but finer; and in being thus furnished it
differs conspicuously from the lower jaw of a whale, which is destitute
of baleen. On the other hand, the extremities of these lower lamellæ
are frayed into fine bristly points, so that they thus curiously
resemble the plates of baleen. In the genus Prion, a member of the
distinct family of the Petrels, the upper mandible alone is furnished
with lamellæ, which are well developed and project beneath the margin;
so that the beak of this bird resembles in this respect the mouth of a
whale.

From the highly developed structure of the shoveller’s beak we may
proceed (as I have learned from information and specimens sent to me by
Mr. Salvin), without any great break, as far as fitness for sifting is
concerned, through the beak of the Merganetta armata, and in some
respects through that of the Aix sponsa, to the beak of the common
duck. In this latter species the lamellæ are much coarser than in the
shoveller, and are firmly attached to the sides of the mandible; they
are only about fifty in number on each side, and do not project at all
beneath the margin. They are square-topped, and are edged with
translucent, hardish tissue, as if for crushing food. The edges of the
lower mandible are crossed by numerous fine ridges, which project very
little. Although the beak is thus very inferior as a sifter to that of
a shoveller, yet this bird, as every one knows, constantly uses it for
this purpose. There are other species, as I hear from Mr. Salvin, in
which the lamellæ are considerably less developed than in the common
duck; but I do not know whether they use their beaks for sifting the
water.

Turning to another group of the same family. In the Egyptian goose
(Chenalopex) the beak closely resembles that of the common duck; but
the lamellæ are not so numerous, nor so distinct from each other, nor
do they project so much inward; yet this goose, as I am informed by Mr.
E. Bartlett, “uses its bill like a duck by throwing the water out at
the corners.” Its chief food, however, is grass, which it crops like
the common goose. In this latter bird the lamellæ of the upper mandible
are much coarser than in the common duck, almost confluent, about
twenty-seven in number on each side, and terminating upward in
teeth-like knobs. The palate is also covered with hard rounded knobs.
The edges of the lower mandible are serrated with teeth much more
prominent, coarser and sharper than in the duck. The common goose does
not sift the water, but uses its beak exclusively for tearing or
cutting herbage, for which purpose it is so well fitted that it can
crop grass closer than almost any other animal. There are other species
of geese, as I hear from Mr. Bartlett, in which the lamellæ are less
developed than in the common goose.

We thus see that a member of the duck family, with a beak constructed
like that of a common goose and adapted solely for grazing, or even a
member with a beak having less well-developed lamellæ, might be
converted by small changes into a species like the Egyptian goose—this
into one like the common duck—and, lastly, into one like the shoveller,
provided with a beak almost exclusively adapted for sifting the water;
for this bird could hardly use any part of its beak, except the hooked
tip, for seizing or tearing solid food. The beak of a goose, as I may
add, might also be converted by small changes into one provided with
prominent, recurved teeth, like those of the Merganser (a member of the
same family), serving for the widely different purpose of securing live
fish.

Returning to the whales. The Hyperoodon bidens is destitute of true
teeth in an efficient condition, but its palate is roughened, according
to Lacepede, with small unequal, hard points of horn. There is,
therefore, nothing improbable in supposing that some early Cetacean
form was provided with similar points of horn on the palate, but rather
more regularly placed, and which, like the knobs on the beak of the
goose, aided it in seizing or tearing its food. If so, it will hardly
be denied that the points might have been converted through variation
and natural selection into lamellæ as well-developed as those of the
Egyptian goose, in which case they would have been used both for
seizing objects and for sifting the water; then into lamellæ like those
of the domestic duck; and so onward, until they became as well
constructed as those of the shoveller, in which case they would have
served exclusively as a sifting apparatus. From this stage, in which
the lamellæ would be two-thirds of the length of the plates of baleen
in the Balænoptera rostrata, gradations, which may be observed in
still-existing Cetaceans, lead us onward to the enormous plates of
baleen in the Greenland whale. Nor is there the least reason to doubt
that each step in this scale might have been as serviceable to certain
ancient Cetaceans, with the functions of the parts slowly changing
during the progress of development, as are the gradations in the beaks
of the different existing members of the duck-family. We should bear in
mind that each species of duck is subjected to a severe struggle for
existence, and that the structure of every part of its frame must be
well adapted to its conditions of life.

The Pleuronectidæ, or Flat-fish, are remarkable for their asymmetrical
bodies. They rest on one side—in the greater number of species on the
left, but in some on the right side; and occasionally reversed adult
specimens occur. The lower, or resting-surface, resembles at first
sight the ventral surface of an ordinary fish; it is of a white colour,
less developed in many ways than the upper side, with the lateral fins
often of smaller size. But the eyes offer the most remarkable
peculiarity; for they are both placed on the upper side of the head.
During early youth, however, they stand opposite to each other, and the
whole body is then symmetrical, with both sides equally coloured. Soon
the eye proper to the lower side begins to glide slowly round the head
to the upper side; but does not pass right through the skull, as was
formerly thought to be the case. It is obvious that unless the lower
eye did thus travel round, it could not be used by the fish while lying
in its habitual position on one side. The lower eye would, also, have
been liable to be abraded by the sandy bottom. That the Pleuronectidæ
are admirably adapted by their flattened and asymmetrical structure for
their habits of life, is manifest from several species, such as soles,
flounders, &c., being extremely common. The chief advantages thus
gained seem to be protection from their enemies, and facility for
feeding on the ground. The different members, however, of the family
present, as Schiödte remarks, “a long series of forms exhibiting a
gradual transition from Hippoglossus pinguis, which does not in any
considerable degree alter the shape in which it leaves the ovum, to the
soles, which are entirely thrown to one side.”

Mr. Mivart has taken up this case, and remarks that a sudden
spontaneous transformation in the position of the eyes is hardly
conceivable, in which I quite agree with him. He then adds: “If the
transit was gradual, then how such transit of one eye a minute fraction
of the journey towards the other side of the head could benefit the
individual is, indeed, far from clear. It seems, even, that such an
incipient transformation must rather have been injurious.” But he might
have found an answer to this objection in the excellent observations
published in 1867 by Malm. The Pleuronectidæ, while very young and
still symmetrical, with their eyes standing on opposite sides of the
head, cannot long retain a vertical position, owing to the excessive
depth of their bodies, the small size of their lateral fins, and to
their being destitute of a swimbladder. Hence, soon growing tired,
they fall to the bottom on one side. While thus at rest they often
twist, as Malm observed, the lower eye upward, to see above them; and
they do this so vigorously that the eye is pressed hard against the
upper part of the orbit. The forehead between the eyes consequently
becomes, as could be plainly seen, temporarily contracted in breadth.
On one occasion Malm saw a young fish raise and depress the lower eye
through an angular distance of about seventy degrees.

We should remember that the skull at this early age is cartilaginous
and flexible, so that it readily yields to muscular action. It is also
known with the higher animals, even after early youth, that the skull
yields and is altered in shape, if the skin or muscles be permanently
contracted through disease or some accident. With long-eared rabbits,
if one ear flops forward and downward, its weight drags forward all the
bones of the skull on the same side, of which I have given a figure.
Malm states that the newly-hatched young of perches, salmon, and
several other symmetrical fishes, have the habit of occasionally
resting on one side at the bottom; and he has observed that they often
then strain their lower eyes so as to look upward; and their skulls are
thus rendered rather crooked. These fishes, however, are soon able to
hold themselves in a vertical position, and no permanent effect is thus
produced. With the Pleuronectidæ, on the other hand, the older they
grow the more habitually they rest on one side, owing to the increasing
flatness of their bodies, and a permanent effect is thus produced on
the form of the head, and on the position of the eyes. Judging from
analogy, the tendency to distortion would no doubt be increased through
the principle of inheritance. Schiödte believes, in opposition to some
other naturalists, that the Pleuronectidæ are not quite symmetrical
even in the embryo; and if this be so, we could understand how it is
that certain species, while young, habitually fall over and rest on the
left side, and other species on the right side. Malm adds, in
confirmation of the above view, that the adult Trachypterus arcticus,
which is not a member of the Pleuronectidæ, rests on its left side at
the bottom, and swims diagonally through the water; and in this fish,
the two sides of the head are said to be somewhat dissimilar. Our great
authority on Fishes, Dr. Günther, concludes his abstract of Malm’s
paper, by remarking that “the author gives a very simple explanation of
the abnormal condition of the Pleuronectoids.”

We thus see that the first stages of the transit of the eye from one
side of the head to the other, which Mr. Mivart considers would be
injurious, may be attributed to the habit, no doubt beneficial to the
individual and to the species, of endeavouring to look upward with both
eyes, while resting on one side at the bottom. We may also attribute to
the inherited effects of use the fact of the mouth in several kinds of
flat-fish being bent towards the lower surface, with the jaw bones
stronger and more effective on this, the eyeless side of the head, than
on the other, for the sake, as Dr. Traquair supposes, of feeding with
ease on the ground. Disuse, on the other hand, will account for the
less developed condition of the whole inferior half of the body,
including the lateral fins; though Yarrel thinks that the reduced size
of these fins is advantageous to the fish, as “there is so much less
room for their action than with the larger fins above.” Perhaps the
lesser number of teeth in the proportion of four to seven in the upper
halves of the two jaws of the plaice, to twenty-five to thirty in the
lower halves, may likewise be accounted for by disuse. From the
colourless state of the ventral surface of most fishes and of many
other animals, we may reasonably suppose that the absence of colour in
flat-fish on the side, whether it be the right or left, which is
under-most, is due to the exclusion of light. But it cannot be supposed
that the peculiar speckled appearance of the upper side of the sole, so
like the sandy bed of the sea, or the power in some species, as
recently shown by Pouchet, of changing their colour in accordance with
the surrounding surface, or the presence of bony tubercles on the upper
side of the turbot, are due to the action of the light. Here natural
selection has probably come into play, as well as in adapting the
general shape of the body of these fishes, and many other
peculiarities, to their habits of life. We should keep in mind, as I
have before insisted, that the inherited effects of the increased use
of parts, and perhaps of their disuse, will be strengthened by natural
selection. For all spontaneous variations in the right direction will
thus be preserved; as will those individuals which inherit in the
highest degree the effects of the increased and beneficial use of any
part. How much to attribute in each particular case to the effects of
use, and how much to natural selection, it seems impossible to decide.

I may give another instance of a structure which apparently owes its
origin exclusively to use or habit. The extremity of the tail in some
American monkeys has been converted into a wonderfully perfect
prehensile organ, and serves as a fifth hand. A reviewer, who agrees
with Mr. Mivart in every detail, remarks on this structure: “It is
impossible to believe that in any number of ages the first slight
incipient tendency to grasp could preserve the lives of the individuals
possessing it, or favour their chance of having and of rearing
offspring.” But there is no necessity for any such belief. Habit, and
this almost implies that some benefit great or small is thus derived,
would in all probability suffice for the work. Brehm saw the young of
an African monkey (Cercopithecus) clinging to the under surface of
their mother by their hands, and at the same time they hooked their
little tails round that of their mother. Professor Henslow kept in
confinement some harvest mice (Mus messorius) which do not possess a
structurally prehensive tail; but he frequently observed that they
curled their tails round the branches of a bush placed in the cage, and
thus aided themselves in climbing. I have received an analogous account
from Dr. Günther, who has seen a mouse thus suspend itself. If the
harvest mouse had been more strictly arboreal, it would perhaps have
had its tail rendered structurally prehensile, as is the case with some
members of the same order. Why Cercopithecus, considering its habits
while young, has not become thus provided, it would be difficult to
say. It is, however, possible that the long tail of this monkey may be
of more service to it as a balancing organ in making its prodigious
leaps, than as a prehensile organ.

The mammary glands are common to the whole class of mammals, and are
indispensable for their existence; they must, therefore, have been
developed at an extremely remote period, and we can know nothing
positively about their manner of development. Mr. Mivart asks: “Is it
conceivable that the young of any animal was ever saved from
destruction by accidentally sucking a drop of scarcely nutritious fluid
from an accidentally hypertrophied cutaneous gland of its mother? And
even if one was so, what chance was there of the perpetuation of such a
variation?” But the case is not here put fairly. It is admitted by most
evolutionists that mammals are descended from a marsupial form; and if
so, the mammary glands will have been at first developed within the
marsupial sack. In the case of the fish (Hippocampus) the eggs are
hatched, and the young are reared for a time, within a sack of this
nature; and an American naturalist, Mr. Lockwood, believes from what he
has seen of the development of the young, that they are nourished by a
secretion from the cutaneous glands of the sack. Now, with the early
progenitors of mammals, almost before they deserved to be thus
designated, is it not at least possible that the young might have been
similarly nourished? And in this case, the individuals which secreted a
fluid, in some degree or manner the most nutritious, so as to partake
of the nature of milk, would in the long run have reared a larger
number of well-nourished offspring, than would the individuals which
secreted a poorer fluid; and thus the cutaneous glands, which are the
homologues of the mammary glands, would have been improved or rendered
more effective. It accords with the widely extended principle of
specialisation, that the glands over a certain space of the sack should
have become more highly developed than the remainder; and they would
then have formed a breast, but at first without a nipple, as we see in
the Ornithorhyncus, at the base of the mammalian series. Through what
agency the glands over a certain space became more highly specialised
than the others, I will not pretend to decide, whether in part through
compensation of growth, the effects of use, or of natural selection.

The development of the mammary glands would have been of no service,
and could not have been affected through natural selection, unless the
young at the same time were able to partake of the secretion. There is
no greater difficulty in understanding how young mammals have
instinctively learned to suck the breast, than in understanding how
unhatched chickens have learned to break the egg-shell by tapping
against it with their specially adapted beaks; or how a few hours after
leaving the shell they have learned to pick up grains of food. In such
cases the most probable solution seems to be, that the habit was at
first acquired by practice at a more advanced age, and afterwards
transmitted to the offspring at an earlier age. But the young kangaroo
is said not to suck, only to cling to the nipple of its mother, who has
the power of injecting milk into the mouth of her helpless, half-formed
offspring. On this head Mr. Mivart remarks: “Did no special provision
exist, the young one must infallibly be choked by the intrusion of the
milk into the wind-pipe. But there _is_ a special provision. The larynx
is so elongated that it rises up into the posterior end of the nasal
passage, and is thus enabled to give free entrance to the air for the
lungs, while the milk passes harmlessly on each side of this elongated
larynx, and so safely attains the gullet behind it.” Mr. Mivart then
asks how did natural selection remove in the adult kangaroo (and in
most other mammals, on the assumption that they are descended from a
marsupial form), “this at least perfectly innocent and harmless
structure?” It may be suggested in answer that the voice, which is
certainly of high importance to many animals, could hardly have been
used with full force as long as the larynx entered the nasal passage;
and Professor Flower has suggested to me that this structure would have
greatly interfered with an animal swallowing solid food.

We will now turn for a short space to the lower divisions of the animal
kingdom. The Echinodermata (star-fishes, sea-urchins, &c.) are
furnished with remarkable organs, called pedicellariæ, which consist,
when well developed, of a tridactyle forceps—that is, of one formed of
three serrated arms, neatly fitting together and placed on the summit
of a flexible stem, moved by muscles. These forceps can seize firmly
hold of any object; and Alexander Agassiz has seen an Echinus or
sea-urchin rapidly passing particles of excrement from forceps to
forceps down certain lines of its body, in order that its shell should
not be fouled. But there is no doubt that besides removing dirt of all
kinds, they subserve other functions; and one of these apparently is
defence.

With respect to these organs, Mr. Mivart, as on so many previous
occasions, asks: “What would be the utility of the _first rudimentary
beginnings_ of such structures, and how could such insipient buddings
have ever preserved the life of a single Echinus?” He adds, “not even
the _sudden_ development of the snapping action would have been
beneficial without the freely movable stalk, nor could the latter have
been efficient without the snapping jaws, yet no minute, nearly
indefinite variations could simultaneously evolve these complex
co-ordinations of structure; to deny this seems to do no less than to
affirm a startling paradox.” Paradoxical as this may appear to Mr.
Mivart, tridactyle forcepses, immovably fixed at the base, but capable
of a snapping action, certainly exist on some star-fishes; and this is
intelligible if they serve, at least in part, as a means of defence.
Mr. Agassiz, to whose great kindness I am indebted for much information
on the subject, informs me that there are other star-fishes, in which
one of the three arms of the forceps is reduced to a support for the
other two; and again, other genera in which the third arm is completely
lost. In Echinoneus, the shell is described by M. Perrier as bearing
two kinds of pedicellariæ, one resembling those of Echinus, and the
other those of Spatangus; and such cases are always interesting as
affording the means of apparently sudden transitions, through the
abortion of one of the two states of an organ.

With respect to the steps by which these curious organs have been
evolved, Mr. Agassiz infers from his own researches and those of Mr.
Müller, that both in star-fishes and sea-urchins the pedicellariæ must
undoubtedly be looked at as modified spines. This may be inferred from
their manner of development in the individual, as well as from a long
and perfect series of gradations in different species and genera, from
simple granules to ordinary spines, to perfect tridactyle pedicellariæ.
The gradation extends even to the manner in which ordinary spines and
the pedicellariæ, with their supporting calcareous rods, are
articulated to the shell. In certain genera of star-fishes, “the very
combinations needed to show that the pedicellariæ are only modified
branching spines” may be found. Thus we have fixed spines, with three
equi-distant, serrated, movable branches, articulated to near their
bases; and higher up, on the same spine, three other movable branches.
Now when the latter arise from the summit of a spine they form, in
fact, a rude tridactyle pedicellariæ, and such may be seen on the same
spine together with the three lower branches. In this case the identity
in nature between the arms of the pedicellariæ and the movable branches
of a spine, is unmistakable. It is generally admitted that the ordinary
spines serve as a protection; and if so, there can be no reason to
doubt that those furnished with serrated and movable branches likewise
serve for the same purpose; and they would thus serve still more
effectively as soon as by meeting together they acted as a prehensile
or snapping apparatus. Thus every gradation, from an ordinary fixed
spine to a fixed pedicellariæ, would be of service.

In certain genera of star-fishes these organs, instead of being fixed
or borne on an immovable support, are placed on the summit of a
flexible and muscular, though short, stem; and in this case they
probably subserve some additional function besides defence. In the
sea-urchins the steps can be followed by which a fixed spine becomes
articulated to the shell, and is thus rendered movable. I wish I had
space here to give a fuller abstract of Mr. Agassiz’s interesting
observations on the development of the pedicellariæ. All possible
gradations, as he adds, may likewise be found between the pedicellariæ
of the star-fishes and the hooks of the Ophiurians, another group of
the Echinodermata; and again between the pedicellariæ of sea-urchins
and the anchors of the Holothuriæ, also belonging to the same great
class.

Certain compound animals, or zoophytes, as they have been termed,
namely the Polyzoa, are provided with curious organs called avicularia.
These differ much in structure in the different species. In their most
perfect condition they curiously resemble the head and beak of a
vulture in miniature, seated on a neck and capable of movement, as is
likewise the lower jaw or mandible. In one species observed by me, all
the avicularia on the same branch often moved simultaneously backwards
and forwards, with the lower jaw widely open, through an angle of about
90 degrees, in the course of five seconds; and their movement caused
the whole polyzoary to tremble. When the jaws are touched with a needle
they seize it so firmly that the branch can thus be shaken.

Mr. Mivart adduces this case, chiefly on account of the supposed
difficulty of organs, namely the avicularia of the Polyzoa and the
pedicellariæ of the Echinodermata, which he considers as “essentially
similar,” having been developed through natural selection in widely
distinct divisions of the animal kingdom. But, as far as structure is
concerned, I can see no similarity between tridactyle pedicellariæ and
avicularia. The latter resembles somewhat more closely the chelæ or
pincers of Crustaceans; and Mr. Mivart might have adduced with equal
appropriateness this resemblance as a special difficulty, or even their
resemblance to the head and beak of a bird. The avicularia are believed
by Mr. Busk, Dr. Smitt and Dr. Nitsche—naturalists who have carefully
studied this group—to be homologous with the zooids and their cells
which compose the zoophyte, the movable lip or lid of the cell
corresponding with the lower and movable mandible of the avicularium.
Mr. Busk, however, does not know of any gradations now existing between
a zooid and an avicularium. It is therefore impossible to conjecture by
what serviceable gradations the one could have been converted into the
other, but it by no means follows from this that such gradations have
not existed.

As the chelæ of Crustaceans resemble in some degree the avicularia of
Polyzoa, both serving as pincers, it may be worth while to show that
with the former a long series of serviceable gradations still exists.
In the first and simplest stage, the terminal segment of a limb shuts
down either on the square summit of the broad penultimate segment, or
against one whole side, and is thus enabled to catch hold of an object,
but the limb still serves as an organ of locomotion. We next find one
corner of the broad penultimate segment slightly prominent, sometimes
furnished with irregular teeth, and against these the terminal segment
shuts down. By an increase in the size of this projection, with its
shape, as well as that of the terminal segment, slightly modified and
improved, the pincers are rendered more and more perfect, until we have
at last an instrument as efficient as the chelæ of a lobster. And all
these gradations can be actually traced.

Besides the avicularia, the polyzoa possess curious organs called
vibracula. These generally consist of long bristles, capable of
movement and easily excited. In one species examined by me the
vibracula were slightly curved and serrated along the outer margin, and
all of them on the same polyzoary often moved simultaneously; so that,
acting like long oars, they swept a branch rapidly across the
object-glass of my microscope. When a branch was placed on its face,
the vibracula became entangled, and they made violent efforts to free
themselves. They are supposed to serve as a defence, and may be seen,
as Mr. Busk remarks, “to sweep slowly and carefully over the surface of
the polyzoary, removing what might be noxious to the delicate
inhabitants of the cells when their tentacula are protruded.” The
avicularia, like the vibracula, probably serve for defence, but they
also catch and kill small living animals, which, it is believed, are
afterwards swept by the currents within reach of the tentacula of the
zooids. Some species are provided with avicularia and vibracula, some
with avicularia alone and a few with vibracula alone.

It is not easy to imagine two objects more widely different in
appearance than a bristle or vibraculum, and an avicularium like the
head of a bird; yet they are almost certainly homologous and have been
developed from the same common source, namely a zooid with its cell.
Hence, we can understand how it is that these organs graduate in some
cases, as I am informed by Mr. Busk, into each other. Thus, with the
avicularia of several species of Lepralia, the movable mandible is so
much produced and is so like a bristle that the presence of the upper
or fixed beak alone serves to determine its avicularian nature. The
vibracula may have been directly developed from the lips of the cells,
without having passed through the avicularian stage; but it seems more
probable that they have passed through this stage, as during the early
stages of the transformation, the other parts of the cell, with the
included zooid, could hardly have disappeared at once. In many cases
the vibracula have a grooved support at the base, which seems to
represent the fixed beak; though this support in some species is quite
absent. This view of the development of the vibracula, if trustworthy,
is interesting; for supposing that all the species provided with
avicularia had become extinct, no one with the most vivid imagination
would ever have thought that the vibracula had originally existed as
part of an organ, resembling a bird’s head, or an irregular box or
hood. It is interesting to see two such widely different organs
developed from a common origin; and as the movable lip of the cell
serves as a protection to the zooid, there is no difficulty in
believing that all the gradations, by which the lip became converted
first into the lower mandible of an avicularium, and then into an
elongated bristle, likewise served as a protection in different ways
and under different circumstances.

In the vegetable kingdom Mr. Mivart only alludes to two cases, namely
the structure of the flowers of orchids, and the movements of climbing
plants. With respect to the former, he says: “The explanation of their
_origin_ is deemed thoroughly unsatisfactory—utterly insufficient to
explain the incipient, infinitesimal beginnings of structures which are
of utility only when they are considerably developed.” As I have fully
treated this subject in another work, I will here give only a few
details on one alone of the most striking peculiarities of the flowers
of orchids, namely, their pollinia. A pollinium, when highly developed,
consists of a mass of pollen-grains, affixed to an elastic foot-stalk
or caudicle, and this to a little mass of extremely viscid matter. The
pollinia are by this means transported by insects from one flower to
the stigma of another. In some orchids there is no caudicle to the
pollen-masses, and the grains are merely tied together by fine threads;
but as these are not confined to orchids, they need not here be
considered; yet I may mention that at the base of the orchidaceous
series, in Cypripedium, we can see how the threads were probably first
developed. In other orchids the threads cohere at one end of the
pollen-masses; and this forms the first or nascent trace of a caudicle.
That this is the origin of the caudicle, even when of considerable
length and highly developed, we have good evidence in the aborted
pollen-grains which can sometimes be detected embedded within the
central and solid parts.

With respect to the second chief peculiarity, namely, the little mass
of viscid matter attached to the end of the caudicle, a long series of
gradations can be specified, each of plain service to the plant. In
most flowers belonging to other orders the stigma secretes a little
viscid matter. Now, in certain orchids similar viscid matter is
secreted, but in much larger quantities by one alone of the three
stigmas; and this stigma, perhaps in consequence of the copious
secretion, is rendered sterile. When an insect visits a flower of this
kind, it rubs off some of the viscid matter, and thus at the same time
drags away some of the pollen-grains. From this simple condition, which
differs but little from that of a multitude of common flowers, there
are endless gradations—to species in which the pollen-mass terminates
in a very short, free caudicle—to others in which the caudicle becomes
firmly attached to the viscid matter, with the sterile stigma itself
much modified. In this latter case we have a pollinium in its most
highly developed and perfect condition. He who will carefully examine
the flowers of orchids for himself will not deny the existence of the
above series of gradations—from a mass of pollen-grains merely tied
together by threads, with the stigma differing but little from that of
the ordinary flowers, to a highly complex pollinium, admirably adapted
for transportal by insects; nor will he deny that all the gradations in
the several species are admirably adapted in relation to the general
structure of each flower for its fertilisation by different insects. In
this, and in almost every other case, the enquiry may be pushed further
backwards; and it may be asked how did the stigma of an ordinary flower
become viscid, but as we do not know the full history of any one group
of beings, it is as useless to ask, as it is hopeless to attempt
answering, such questions.

We will now turn to climbing plants. These can be arranged in a long
series, from those which simply twine round a support, to those which I
have called leaf-climbers, and to those provided with tendrils. In
these two latter classes the stems have generally, but not always, lost
the power of twining, though they retain the power of revolving, which
the tendrils likewise possess. The gradations from leaf-climbers to
tendril bearers are wonderfully close, and certain plants may be
differently placed in either class. But in ascending the series from
simple twiners to leaf-climbers, an important quality is added, namely
sensitiveness to a touch, by which means the foot-stalks of the leaves
or flowers, or these modified and converted into tendrils, are excited
to bend round and clasp the touching object. He who will read my memoir
on these plants will, I think, admit that all the many gradations in
function and structure between simple twiners and tendril-bearers are
in each case beneficial in a high degree to the species. For instance,
it is clearly a great advantage to a twining plant to become a
leaf-climber; and it is probable that every twiner which possessed
leaves with long foot-stalks would have been developed into a
leaf-climber, if the foot-stalks had possessed in any slight degree the
requisite sensitiveness to a touch.

As twining is the simplest means of ascending a support, and forms the
basis of our series, it may naturally be asked how did plants acquire
this power in an incipient degree, afterwards to be improved and
increased through natural selection. The power of twining depends,
firstly, on the stems while young being extremely flexible (but this is
a character common to many plants which are not climbers); and,
secondly, on their continually bending to all points of the compass,
one after the other in succession, in the same order. By this movement
the stems are inclined to all sides, and are made to move round and
round. As soon as the lower part of a stem strikes against any object
and is stopped, the upper part still goes on bending and revolving, and
thus necessarily twines round and up the support. The revolving
movement ceases after the early growth of each shoot. As in many widely
separated families of plants, single species and single genera possess
the power of revolving, and have thus become twiners, they must have
independently acquired it, and cannot have inherited it from a common
progenitor. Hence, I was led to predict that some slight tendency to a
movement of this kind would be found to be far from uncommon with
plants which did not climb; and that this had afforded the basis for
natural selection to work on and improve. When I made this prediction,
I knew of only one imperfect case, namely, of the young
flower-peduncles of a Maurandia which revolved slightly and
irregularly, like the stems of twining plants, but without making any
use of this habit. Soon afterwards Fritz Müller discovered that the
young stems of an Alisma and of a Linum—plants which do not climb and
are widely separated in the natural system—revolved plainly, though
irregularly, and he states that he has reason to suspect that this
occurs with some other plants. These slight movements appear to be of
no service to the plants in question; anyhow, they are not of the least
use in the way of climbing, which is the point that concerns us.
Nevertheless we can see that if the stems of these plants had been
flexible, and if under the conditions to which they are exposed it had
profited them to ascend to a height, then the habit of slightly and
irregularly revolving might have been increased and utilised through
natural selection, until they had become converted into well-developed
twining species.

With respect to the sensitiveness of the foot-stalks of the leaves and
flowers, and of tendrils, nearly the same remarks are applicable as in
the case of the revolving movements of twining plants. As a vast number
of species, belonging to widely distinct groups, are endowed with this
kind of sensitiveness, it ought to be found in a nascent condition in
many plants which have not become climbers. This is the case: I
observed that the young flower-peduncles of the above Maurandia curved
themselves a little towards the side which was touched. Morren found in
several species of Oxalis that the leaves and their foot-stalks moved,
especially after exposure to a hot sun, when they were gently and
repeatedly touched, or when the plant was shaken. I repeated these
observations on some other species of Oxalis with the same result; in
some of them the movement was distinct, but was best seen in the young
leaves; in others it was extremely slight. It is a more important fact
that according to the high authority of Hofmeister, the young shoots
and leaves of all plants move after being shaken; and with climbing
plants it is, as we know, only during the early stages of growth that
the foot-stalks and tendrils are sensitive.

It is scarcely possible that the above slight movements, due to a touch
or shake, in the young and growing organs of plants, can be of any
functional importance to them. But plants possess, in obedience to
various stimuli, powers of movement, which are of manifest importance
to them; for instance, towards and more rarely from the light—in
opposition to, and more rarely in the direction of, the attraction of
gravity. When the nerves and muscles of an animal are excited by
galvanism or by the absorption of strychnine, the consequent movements
may be called an incidental result, for the nerves and muscles have not
been rendered specially sensitive to these stimuli. So with plants it
appears that, from having the power of movement in obedience to certain
stimuli, they are excited in an incidental manner by a touch, or by
being shaken. Hence there is no great difficulty in admitting that in
the case of leaf-climbers and tendril-bearers, it is this tendency
which has been taken advantage of and increased through natural
selection. It is, however, probable, from reasons which I have assigned
in my memoir, that this will have occurred only with plants which had
already acquired the power of revolving, and had thus become twiners.

I have already endeavoured to explain how plants became twiners,
namely, by the increase of a tendency to slight and irregular revolving
movements, which were at first of no use to them; this movement, as
well as that due to a touch or shake, being the incidental result of
the power of moving, gained for other and beneficial purposes. Whether,
during the gradual development of climbing plants, natural selection
has been aided by the inherited effects of use, I will not pretend to
decide; but we know that certain periodical movements, for instance the
so-called sleep of plants, are governed by habit.

I have now considered enough, perhaps more than enough, of the cases,
selected with care by a skilful naturalist, to prove that natural
selection is incompetent to account for the incipient stages of useful
structures; and I have shown, as I hope, that there is no great
difficulty on this head. A good opportunity has thus been afforded for
enlarging a little on gradations of structure, often associated with
strange functions—an important subject, which was not treated at
sufficient length in the former editions of this work. I will now
briefly recapitulate the foregoing cases.

With the giraffe, the continued preservation of the individuals of some
extinct high-reaching ruminant, which had the longest necks, legs, &c.,
and could browse a little above the average height, and the continued
destruction of those which could not browse so high, would have
sufficed for the production of this remarkable quadruped; but the
prolonged use of all the parts, together with inheritance, will have
aided in an important manner in their co-ordination. With the many
insects which imitate various objects, there is no improbability in the
belief that an accidental resemblance to some common object was in each
case the foundation for the work of natural selection, since perfected
through the occasional preservation of slight variations which made the
resemblance at all closer; and this will have been carried on as long
as the insect continued to vary, and as long as a more and more perfect
resemblance led to its escape from sharp-sighted enemies. In certain
species of whales there is a tendency to the formation of irregular
little points of horn on the palate; and it seems to be quite within
the scope of natural selection to preserve all favourable variations,
until the points were converted, first into lamellated knobs or teeth,
like those on the beak of a goose—then into short lamellæ, like those
of the domestic ducks—and then into lamellæ, as perfect as those of the
shoveller-duck—and finally into the gigantic plates of baleen, as in
the mouth of the Greenland whale. In the family of the ducks, the
lamellæ are first used as teeth, then partly as teeth and partly as a
sifting apparatus, and at last almost exclusively for this latter
purpose.

With such structures as the above lamellæ of horn or whalebone, habit
or use can have done little or nothing, as far as we can judge, towards
their development. On the other hand, the transportal of the lower eye
of a flat-fish to the upper side of the head, and the formation of a
prehensile tail, may be attributed almost wholly to continued use,
together with inheritance. With respect to the mammæ of the higher
animals, the most probable conjecture is that primordially the
cutaneous glands over the whole surface of a marsupial sack secreted a
nutritious fluid; and that these glands were improved in function
through natural selection, and concentrated into a confined area, in
which case they would have formed a mamma. There is no more difficulty
in understanding how the branched spines of some ancient Echinoderm,
which served as a defence, became developed through natural selection
into tridactyle pedicellariæ, than in understanding the development of
the pincers of crustaceans, through slight, serviceable modifications
in the ultimate and penultimate segments of a limb, which was at first
used solely for locomotion. In the avicularia and vibracula of the
Polyzoa we have organs widely different in appearance developed from
the same source; and with the vibracula we can understand how the
successive gradations might have been of service. With the pollinia of
orchids, the threads which originally served to tie together the
pollen-grains, can be traced cohering into caudicles; and the steps can
likewise be followed by which viscid matter, such as that secreted by
the stigmas of ordinary flowers, and still subserving nearly but not
quite the same purpose, became attached to the free ends of the
caudicles—all these gradations being of manifest benefit to the plants
in question. With respect to climbing plants, I need not repeat what
has been so lately said.

It has often been asked, if natural selection be so potent, why has not
this or that structure been gained by certain species, to which it
would apparently have been advantageous? But it is unreasonable to
expect a precise answer to such questions, considering our ignorance of
the past history of each species, and of the conditions which at the
present day determine its numbers and range. In most cases only general
reasons, but in some few cases special reasons, can be assigned. Thus
to adapt a species to new habits of life, many co-ordinated
modifications are almost indispensable, and it may often have happened
that the requisite parts did not vary in the right manner or to the
right degree. Many species must have been prevented from increasing in
numbers through destructive agencies, which stood in no relation to
certain structures, which we imagine would have been gained through
natural selection from appearing to us advantageous to the species. In
this case, as the struggle for life did not depend on such structures,
they could not have been acquired through natural selection. In many
cases complex and long-enduring conditions, often of a peculiar nature,
are necessary for the development of a structure; and the requisite
conditions may seldom have concurred. The belief that any given
structure, which we think, often erroneously, would have been
beneficial to a species, would have been gained under all circumstances
through natural selection, is opposed to what we can understand of its
manner of action. Mr. Mivart does not deny that natural selection has
effected something; but he considers it as “demonstrably insufficient”
to account for the phenomena which I explain by its agency. His chief
arguments have now been considered, and the others will hereafter be
considered. They seem to me to partake little of the character of
demonstration, and to have little weight in comparison with those in
favour of the power of natural selection, aided by the other agencies
often specified. I am bound to add, that some of the facts and
arguments here used by me, have been advanced for the same purpose in
an able article lately published in the “Medico-Chirurgical Review.”

At the present day almost all naturalists admit evolution under some
form. Mr. Mivart believes that species change through “an internal
force or tendency,” about which it is not pretended that anything is
known. That species have a capacity for change will be admitted by all
evolutionists; but there is no need, as it seems to me, to invoke any
internal force beyond the tendency to ordinary variability, which
through the aid of selection, by man has given rise to many
well-adapted domestic races, and which, through the aid of natural
selection, would equally well give rise by graduated steps to natural
races or species. The final result will generally have been, as already
explained, an advance, but in some few cases a retrogression, in
organisation.

Mr. Mivart is further inclined to believe, and some naturalists agree
with him, that new species manifest themselves “with suddenness and by
modifications appearing at once.” For instance, he supposes that the
differences between the extinct three-toed Hipparion and the horse
arose suddenly. He thinks it difficult to believe that the wing of a
bird “was developed in any other way than by a comparatively sudden
modification of a marked and important kind;” and apparently he would
extend the same view to the wings of bats and pterodactyles. This
conclusion, which implies great breaks or discontinuity in the series,
appears to me improbable in the highest degree.

Everyone who believes in slow and gradual evolution, will of course
admit that specific changes may have been as abrupt and as great as any
single variation which we meet with under nature, or even under
domestication. But as species are more variable when domesticated or
cultivated than under their natural conditions, it is not probable that
such great and abrupt variations have often occurred under nature, as
are known occasionally to arise under domestication. Of these latter
variations several may be attributed to reversion; and the characters
which thus reappear were, it is probable, in many cases at first gained
in a gradual manner. A still greater number must be called
monstrosities, such as six-fingered men, porcupine men, Ancon sheep,
Niata cattle, &c.; and as they are widely different in character from
natural species, they throw very little light on our subject. Excluding
such cases of abrupt variations, the few which remain would at best
constitute, if found in a state of nature, doubtful species, closely
related to their parental types.

My reasons for doubting whether natural species have changed as
abruptly as have occasionally domestic races, and for entirely
disbelieving that they have changed in the wonderful manner indicated
by Mr. Mivart, are as follows. According to our experience, abrupt and
strongly marked variations occur in our domesticated productions,
singly and at rather long intervals of time. If such occurred under
nature, they would be liable, as formerly explained, to be lost by
accidental causes of destruction and by subsequent intercrossing; and
so it is known to be under domestication, unless abrupt variations of
this kind are specially preserved and separated by the care of man.
Hence, in order that a new species should suddenly appear in the manner
supposed by Mr. Mivart, it is almost necessary to believe, in
opposition to all analogy, that several wonderfully changed individuals
appeared simultaneously within the same district. This difficulty, as
in the case of unconscious selection by man, is avoided on the theory
of gradual evolution, through the preservation of a large number of
individuals, which varied more or less in any favourable direction, and
of the destruction of a large number which varied in an opposite
manner.

That many species have been evolved in an extremely gradual manner,
there can hardly be a doubt. The species and even the genera of many
large natural families are so closely allied together that it is
difficult to distinguish not a few of them. On every continent, in
proceeding from north to south, from lowland to upland, &c., we meet
with a host of closely related or representative species; as we
likewise do on certain distinct continents, which we have reason to
believe were formerly connected. But in making these and the following
remarks, I am compelled to allude to subjects hereafter to be
discussed. Look at the many outlying islands round a continent, and see
how many of their inhabitants can be raised only to the rank of
doubtful species. So it is if we look to past times, and compare the
species which have just passed away with those still living within the
same areas; or if we compare the fossil species embedded in the
sub-stages of the same geological formation. It is indeed manifest that
multitudes of species are related in the closest manner to other
species that still exist, or have lately existed; and it will hardly be
maintained that such species have been developed in an abrupt or sudden
manner. Nor should it be forgotten, when we look to the special parts
of allied species, instead of to distinct species, that numerous and
wonderfully fine gradations can be traced, connecting together widely
different structures.

Many large groups of facts are intelligible only on the principle that
species have been evolved by very small steps. For instance, the fact
that the species included in the larger genera are more closely related
to each other, and present a greater number of varieties than do the
species in the smaller genera. The former are also grouped in little
clusters, like varieties round species; and they present other
analogies with varieties, as was shown in our second chapter. On this
same principle we can understand how it is that specific characters are
more variable than generic characters; and how the parts which are
developed in an extraordinary degree or manner are more variable than
other parts of the same species. Many analogous facts, all pointing in
the same direction, could be added.

Although very many species have almost certainly been produced by steps
not greater than those separating fine varieties; yet it may be
maintained that some have been developed in a different and abrupt
manner. Such an admission, however, ought not to be made without strong
evidence being assigned. The vague and in some respects false
analogies, as they have been shown to be by Mr. Chauncey Wright, which
have been advanced in favour of this view, such as the sudden
crystallisation of inorganic substances, or the falling of a facetted
spheroid from one facet to another, hardly deserve consideration. One
class of facts, however, namely, the sudden appearance of new and
distinct forms of life in our geological formations supports at first
sight the belief in abrupt development. But the value of this evidence
depends entirely on the perfection of the geological record, in
relation to periods remote in the history of the world. If the record
is as fragmentary as many geologists strenuously assert, there is
nothing strange in new forms appearing as if suddenly developed.

Unless we admit transformations as prodigious as those advocated by Mr.
Mivart, such as the sudden development of the wings of birds or bats,
or the sudden conversion of a Hipparion into a horse, hardly any light
is thrown by the belief in abrupt modifications on the deficiency of
connecting links in our geological formations. But against the belief
in such abrupt changes, embryology enters a strong protest. It is
notorious that the wings of birds and bats, and the legs of horses or
other quadrupeds, are undistinguishable at an early embryonic period,
and that they become differentiated by insensibly fine steps.
Embryological resemblances of all kinds can be accounted for, as we
shall hereafter see, by the progenitors of our existing species having
varied after early youth, and having transmitted their newly-acquired
characters to their offspring, at a corresponding age. The embryo is
thus left almost unaffected, and serves as a record of the past
condition of the species. Hence it is that existing species during the
early stages of their development so often resemble ancient and extinct
forms belonging to the same class. On this view of the meaning of
embryological resemblances, and indeed on any view, it is incredible
that an animal should have undergone such momentous and abrupt
transformations as those above indicated, and yet should not bear even
a trace in its embryonic condition of any sudden modification, every
detail in its structure being developed by insensibly fine steps.

He who believes that some ancient form was transformed suddenly through
an internal force or tendency into, for instance, one furnished with
wings, will be almost compelled to assume, in opposition to all
analogy, that many individuals varied simultaneously. It cannot be
denied that such abrupt and great changes of structure are widely
different from those which most species apparently have undergone. He
will further be compelled to believe that many structures beautifully
adapted to all the other parts of the same creature and to the
surrounding conditions, have been suddenly produced; and of such
complex and wonderful co-adaptations, he will not be able to assign a
shadow of an explanation. He will be forced to admit that these great
and sudden transformations have left no trace of their action on the
embryo. To admit all this is, as it seems to me, to enter into the
realms of miracle, and to leave those of science.

CHAPTER VIII.
INSTINCT.

Instincts comparable with habits, but different in their
origin—Instincts graduated—Aphides and ants—Instincts variable—Domestic
instincts, their origin—Natural instincts of the cuckoo, molothrus,
ostrich, and parasitic bees—Slave-making ants—Hive-bee, its cell-making
instinct—Changes of instinct and structure not necessarily
simultaneous—Difficulties of the theory of the Natural Selection of
instincts—Neuter or sterile insects—Summary.

Many instincts are so wonderful that their development will probably
appear to the reader a difficulty sufficient to overthrow my whole
theory. I may here premise, that I have nothing to do with the origin
of the mental powers, any more than I have with that of life itself. We
are concerned only with the diversities of instinct and of the other
mental faculties in animals of the same class.

I will not attempt any definition of instinct. It would be easy to show
that several distinct mental actions are commonly embraced by this
term; but every one understands what is meant, when it is said that
instinct impels the cuckoo to migrate and to lay her eggs in other
birds’ nests. An action, which we ourselves require experience to
enable us to perform, when performed by an animal, more especially by a
very young one, without experience, and when performed by many
individuals in the same way, without their knowing for what purpose it
is performed, is usually said to be instinctive. But I could show that
none of these characters are universal. A little dose of judgment or
reason, as Pierre Huber expresses it, often comes into play, even with
animals low in the scale of nature.

Frederick Cuvier and several of the older metaphysicians have compared
instinct with habit. This comparison gives, I think, an accurate notion
of the frame of mind under which an instinctive action is performed,
but not necessarily of its origin. How unconsciously many habitual
actions are performed, indeed not rarely in direct opposition to our
conscious will! yet they may be modified by the will or reason. Habits
easily become associated with other habits, with certain periods of
time and states of the body. When once acquired, they often remain
constant throughout life. Several other points of resemblance between
instincts and habits could be pointed out. As in repeating a well-known
song, so in instincts, one action follows another by a sort of rhythm;
if a person be interrupted in a song, or in repeating anything by rote,
he is generally forced to go back to recover the habitual train of
thought: so P. Huber found it was with a caterpillar, which makes a
very complicated hammock; for if he took a caterpillar which had
completed its hammock up to, say, the sixth stage of construction, and
put it into a hammock completed up only to the third stage, the
caterpillar simply re-performed the fourth, fifth, and sixth stages of
construction. If, however, a caterpillar were taken out of a hammock
made up, for instance, to the third stage, and were put into one
finished up to the sixth stage, so that much of its work was already
done for it, far from deriving any benefit from this, it was much
embarrassed, and, in order to complete its hammock, seemed forced to
start from the third stage, where it had left off, and thus tried to
complete the already finished work.

If we suppose any habitual action to become inherited—and it can be
shown that this does sometimes happen—then the resemblance between what
originally was a habit and an instinct becomes so close as not to be
distinguished. If Mozart, instead of playing the pianoforte at three
years old with wonderfully little practice, had played a tune with no
practice at all, be might truly be said to have done so instinctively.
But it would be a serious error to suppose that the greater number of
instincts have been acquired by habit in one generation, and then
transmitted by inheritance to succeeding generations. It can be clearly
shown that the most wonderful instincts with which we are acquainted,
namely, those of the hive-bee and of many ants, could not possibly have
been acquired by habit.

It will be universally admitted that instincts are as important as
corporeal structures for the welfare of each species, under its present
conditions of life. Under changed conditions of life, it is at least
possible that slight modifications of instinct might be profitable to a
species; and if it can be shown that instincts do vary ever so little,
then I can see no difficulty in natural selection preserving and
continually accumulating variations of instinct to any extent that was
profitable. It is thus, as I believe, that all the most complex and
wonderful instincts have originated. As modifications of corporeal
structure arise from, and are increased by, use or habit, and are
diminished or lost by disuse, so I do not doubt it has been with
instincts. But I believe that the effects of habit are in many cases of
subordinate importance to the effects of the natural selection of what
may be called spontaneous variations of instincts;—that is of
variations produced by the same unknown causes which produce slight
deviations of bodily structure.

No complex instinct can possibly be produced through natural selection,
except by the slow and gradual accumulation of numerous, slight, yet
profitable, variations. Hence, as in the case of corporeal structures,
we ought to find in nature, not the actual transitional gradations by
which each complex instinct has been acquired—for these could be found
only in the lineal ancestors of each species—but we ought to find in
the collateral lines of descent some evidence of such gradations; or we
ought at least to be able to show that gradations of some kind are
possible; and this we certainly can do. I have been surprised to find,
making allowance for the instincts of animals having been but little
observed, except in Europe and North America, and for no instinct being
known among extinct species, how very generally gradations, leading to
the most complex instincts, can be discovered. Changes of instinct may
sometimes be facilitated by the same species having different instincts
at different periods of life, or at different seasons of the year, or
when placed under different circumstances, &c.; in which case either
the one or the other instinct might be preserved by natural selection.
And such instances of diversity of instinct in the same species can be
shown to occur in nature.

Again, as in the case of corporeal structure, and conformably to my
theory, the instinct of each species is good for itself, but has never,
as far as we can judge, been produced for the exclusive good of others.
One of the strongest instances of an animal apparently performing an
action for the sole good of another, with which I am acquainted, is
that of aphides voluntarily yielding, as was first observed by Huber,
their sweet excretion to ants: that they do so voluntarily, the
following facts show. I removed all the ants from a group of about a
dozen aphides on a dock-plant, and prevented their attendance during
several hours. After this interval, I felt sure that the aphides would
want to excrete. I watched them for some time through a lens, but not
one excreted; I then tickled and stroked them with a hair in the same
manner, as well as I could, as the ants do with their antennæ; but not
one excreted. Afterwards, I allowed an ant to visit them, and it
immediately seemed, by its eager way of running about to be well aware
what a rich flock it had discovered; it then began to play with its
antennæ on the abdomen first of one aphis and then of another; and
each, as soon as it felt the antennæ, immediately lifted up its abdomen
and excreted a limpid drop of sweet juice, which was eagerly devoured
by the ant. Even the quite young aphides behaved in this manner,
showing that the action was instinctive, and not the result of
experience. It is certain, from the observations of Huber, that the
aphides show no dislike to the ants: if the latter be not present they
are at last compelled to eject their excretion. But as the excretion is
extremely viscid, it is no doubt a convenience to the aphides to have
it removed; therefore probably they do not excrete solely for the good
of the ants. Although there is no evidence that any animal performs an
action for the exclusive good of another species, yet each tries to
take advantage of the instincts of others, as each takes advantage of
the weaker bodily structure of other species. So again certain
instincts cannot be considered as absolutely perfect; but as details on
this and other such points are not indispensable, they may be here
passed over.

As some degree of variation in instincts under a state of nature, and
the inheritance of such variations, are indispensable for the action of
natural selection, as many instances as possible ought to be given; but
want of space prevents me. I can only assert that instincts certainly
do vary—for instance, the migratory instinct, both in extent and
direction, and in its total loss. So it is with the nests of birds,
which vary partly in dependence on the situations chosen, and on the
nature and temperature of the country inhabited, but often from causes
wholly unknown to us. Audubon has given several remarkable cases of
differences in the nests of the same species in the northern and
southern United States. Why, it has been asked, if instinct be
variable, has it not granted to the bee “the ability to use some other
material when wax was deficient?” But what other natural material could
bees use? They will work, as I have seen, with wax hardened with
vermilion or softened with lard. Andrew Knight observed that his bees,
instead of laboriously collecting propolis, used a cement of wax and
turpentine, with which he had covered decorticated trees. It has lately
been shown that bees, instead of searching for pollen, will gladly use
a very different substance, namely, oatmeal. Fear of any particular
enemy is certainly an instinctive quality, as may be seen in nestling
birds, though it is strengthened by experience, and by the sight of
fear of the same enemy in other animals. The fear of man is slowly
acquired, as I have elsewhere shown, by the various animals which
inhabit desert islands; and we see an instance of this, even in
England, in the greater wildness of all our large birds in comparison
with our small birds; for the large birds have been most persecuted by
man. We may safely attribute the greater wildness of our large birds to
this cause; for in uninhabited islands large birds are not more fearful
than small; and the magpie, so wary in England, is tame in Norway, as
is the hooded crow in Egypt.

That the mental qualities of animals of the same kind, born in a state
of nature, vary much, could be shown by many facts. Several cases could
also be adduced of occasional and strange habits in wild animals,
which, if advantageous to the species, might have given rise, through
natural selection, to new instincts. But I am well aware that these
general statements, without the facts in detail, can produce but a
feeble effect on the reader’s mind. I can only repeat my assurance,
that I do not speak without good evidence.

_Inherited Changes of Habit or Instinct in Domesticated Animals._

The possibility, or even probability, of inherited variations of
instinct in a state of nature will be strengthened by briefly
considering a few cases under domestication. We shall thus be enabled
to see the part which habit and the selection of so-called spontaneous
variations have played in modifying the mental qualities of our
domestic animals. It is notorious how much domestic animals vary in
their mental qualities. With cats, for instance, one naturally takes to
catching rats, and another mice, and these tendencies are known to be
inherited. One cat, according to Mr. St. John, always brought home game
birds, another hares or rabbits, and another hunted on marshy ground
and almost nightly caught woodcocks or snipes. A number of curious and
authentic instances could be given of various shades of disposition and
taste, and likewise of the oddest tricks, associated with certain
frames of mind or periods of time. But let us look to the familiar case
of the breeds of dogs: it cannot be doubted that young pointers (I have
myself seen striking instances) will sometimes point and even back
other dogs the very first time that they are taken out; retrieving is
certainly in some degree inherited by retrievers; and a tendency to run
round, instead of at, a flock of sheep, by shepherd-dogs. I cannot see
that these actions, performed without experience by the young, and in
nearly the same manner by each individual, performed with eager delight
by each breed, and without the end being known—for the young pointer
can no more know that he points to aid his master, than the white
butterfly knows why she lays her eggs on the leaf of the cabbage—I
cannot see that these actions differ essentially from true instincts.
If we were to behold one kind of wolf, when young and without any
training, as soon as it scented its prey, stand motionless like a
statue, and then slowly crawl forward with a peculiar gait; and another
kind of wolf rushing round, instead of at, a herd of deer, and driving
them to a distant point, we should assuredly call these actions
instinctive. Domestic instincts, as they may be called, are certainly
far less fixed than natural instincts; but they have been acted on by
far less rigorous selection, and have been transmitted for an
incomparably shorter period, under less fixed conditions of life.

How strongly these domestic instincts, habits, and dispositions are
inherited, and how curiously they become mingled, is well shown when
different breeds of dogs are crossed. Thus it is known that a cross
with a bull-dog has affected for many generations the courage and
obstinacy of greyhounds; and a cross with a greyhound has given to a
whole family of shepherd-dogs a tendency to hunt hares. These domestic
instincts, when thus tested by crossing, resemble natural instincts,
which in a like manner become curiously blended together, and for a
long period exhibit traces of the instincts of either parent: for
example, Le Roy describes a dog, whose great-grandfather was a wolf,
and this dog showed a trace of its wild parentage only in one way, by
not coming in a straight line to his master, when called.

Domestic instincts are sometimes spoken of as actions which have become
inherited solely from long-continued and compulsory habit, but this is
not true. No one would ever have thought of teaching, or probably could
have taught, the tumbler-pigeon to tumble—an action which, as I have
witnessed, is performed by young birds, that have never seen a pigeon
tumble. We may believe that some one pigeon showed a slight tendency to
this strange habit, and that the long-continued selection of the best
individuals in successive generations made tumblers what they now are;
and near Glasgow there are house-tumblers, as I hear from Mr. Brent,
which cannot fly eighteen inches high without going head over heels. It
may be doubted whether any one would have thought of training a dog to
point, had not some one dog naturally shown a tendency in this line;
and this is known occasionally to happen, as I once saw, in a pure
terrier: the act of pointing is probably, as many have thought, only
the exaggerated pause of an animal preparing to spring on its prey.
When the first tendency to point was once displayed, methodical
selection and the inherited effects of compulsory training in each
successive generation would soon complete the work; and unconscious
selection is still in progress, as each man tries to procure, without
intending to improve the breed, dogs which stand and hunt best. On the
other hand, habit alone in some cases has sufficed; hardly any animal
is more difficult to tame than the young of the wild rabbit; scarcely
any animal is tamer than the young of the tame rabbit; but I can hardly
suppose that domestic rabbits have often been selected for tameness
alone; so that we must attribute at least the greater part of the
inherited change from extreme wildness to extreme tameness, to habit
and long-continued close confinement.

Natural instincts are lost under domestication: a remarkable instance
of this is seen in those breeds of fowls which very rarely or never
become “broody,” that is, never wish to sit on their eggs. Familiarity
alone prevents our seeing how largely and how permanently the minds of
our domestic animals have been modified. It is scarcely possible to
doubt that the love of man has become instinctive in the dog. All
wolves, foxes, jackals and species of the cat genus, when kept tame,
are most eager to attack poultry, sheep and pigs; and this tendency has
been found incurable in dogs which have been brought home as puppies
from countries such as Tierra del Fuego and Australia, where the
savages do not keep these domestic animals. How rarely, on the other
hand, do our civilised dogs, even when quite young, require to be
taught not to attack poultry, sheep, and pigs! No doubt they
occasionally do make an attack, and are then beaten; and if not cured,
they are destroyed; so that habit and some degree of selection have
probably concurred in civilising by inheritance our dogs. On the other
hand, young chickens have lost wholly by habit, that fear of the dog
and cat which no doubt was originally instinctive in them, for I am
informed by Captain Hutton that the young chickens of the parent stock,
the Gallus bankiva, when reared in India under a hen, are at first
excessively wild. So it is with young pheasants reared in England under
a hen. It is not that chickens have lost all fear, but fear only of
dogs and cats, for if the hen gives the danger chuckle they will run
(more especially young turkeys) from under her and conceal themselves
in the surrounding grass or thickets; and this is evidently done for
the instinctive purpose of allowing, as we see in wild ground-birds,
their mother to fly away. But this instinct retained by our chickens
has become useless under domestication, for the mother-hen has almost
lost by disuse the power of flight.

Hence, we may conclude that under domestication instincts have been
acquired and natural instincts have been lost, partly by habit and
partly by man selecting and accumulating, during successive
generations, peculiar mental habits and actions, which at first
appeared from what we must in our ignorance call an accident. In some
cases compulsory habit alone has sufficed to produce inherited mental
changes; in other cases compulsory habit has done nothing, and all has
been the result of selection, pursued both methodically and
unconsciously; but in most cases habit and selection have probably
concurred.

_Special Instincts._

We shall, perhaps, best understand how instincts in a state of nature
have become modified by selection by considering a few cases. I will
select only three, namely, the instinct which leads the cuckoo to lay
her eggs in other birds’ nests; the slave-making instinct of certain
ants; and the cell-making power of the hive-bee: these two latter
instincts have generally and justly been ranked by naturalists as the
most wonderful of all known instincts.

_Instincts of the Cuckoo._—It is supposed by some naturalists that the
more immediate cause of the instinct of the cuckoo is that she lays her
eggs, not daily, but at intervals of two or three days; so that, if she
were to make her own nest and sit on her own eggs, those first laid
would have to be left for some time unincubated or there would be eggs
and young birds of different ages in the same nest. If this were the
case the process of laying and hatching might be inconveniently long,
more especially as she migrates at a very early period; and the first
hatched young would probably have to be fed by the male alone. But the
American cuckoo is in this predicament, for she makes her own nest and
has eggs and young successively hatched, all at the same time. It has
been both asserted and denied that the American cuckoo occasionally
lays her eggs in other birds’ nests; but I have lately heard from Dr.
Merrill, of Iowa, that he once found in Illinois a young cuckoo,
together with a young jay in the nest of a blue jay (Garrulus
cristatus); and as both were nearly full feathered, there could be no
mistake in their identification. I could also give several instances of
various birds which have been known occasionally to lay their eggs in
other birds’ nests. Now let us suppose that the ancient progenitor of
our European cuckoo had the habits of the American cuckoo, and that she
occasionally laid an egg in another bird’s nest. If the old bird
profited by this occasional habit through being enabled to emigrate
earlier or through any other cause; or if the young were made more
vigorous by advantage being taken of the mistaken instinct of another
species than when reared by their own mother, encumbered as she could
hardly fail to be by having eggs and young of different ages at the
same time, then the old birds or the fostered young would gain an
advantage. And analogy would lead us to believe, that the young thus
reared would be apt to follow by inheritance the occasional and
aberrant habit of their mother, and in their turn would be apt to lay
their eggs in other birds’ nests, and thus be more successful in
rearing their young. By a continued process of this nature, I believe
that the strange instinct of our cuckoo has been generated. It has,
also recently been ascertained on sufficient evidence, by Adolf Müller,
that the cuckoo occasionally lays her eggs on the bare ground, sits on
them and feeds her young. This rare event is probably a case of
reversion to the long-lost, aboriginal instinct of nidification.

It has been objected that I have not noticed other related instincts
and adaptations of structure in the cuckoo, which are spoken of as
necessarily co-ordinated. But in all cases, speculation on an instinct
known to us only in a single species, is useless, for we have hitherto
had no facts to guide us. Until recently the instincts of the European
and of the non-parasitic American cuckoo alone were known; now, owing
to Mr. Ramsay’s observations, we have learned something about three
Australian species, which lay their eggs in other birds’ nests. The
chief points to be referred to are three: first, that the common
cuckoo, with rare exceptions, lays only one egg in a nest, so that the
large and voracious young bird receives ample food. Secondly, that the
eggs are remarkably small, not exceeding those of the skylark—a bird
about one-fourth as large as the cuckoo. That the small size of the egg
is a real case of adaptation we may infer from the fact of the
mon-parasitic American cuckoo laying full-sized eggs. Thirdly, that the
young cuckoo, soon after birth, has the instinct, the strength and a
properly shaped back for ejecting its foster-brothers, which then
perish from cold and hunger. This has been boldly called a beneficent
arrangement, in order that the young cuckoo may get sufficient food,
and that its foster-brothers may perish before they had acquired much
feeling!

Turning now to the Australian species: though these birds generally lay
only one egg in a nest, it is not rare to find two and even three eggs
in the same nest. In the bronze cuckoo the eggs vary greatly in size,
from eight to ten lines in length. Now, if it had been of an advantage
to this species to have laid eggs even smaller than those now laid, so
as to have deceived certain foster-parents, or, as is more probable, to
have been hatched within a shorter period (for it is asserted that
there is a relation between the size of eggs and the period of their
incubation), then there is no difficulty in believing that a race or
species might have been formed which would have laid smaller and
smaller eggs; for these would have been more safely hatched and reared.
Mr. Ramsay remarks that two of the Australian cuckoos, when they lay
their eggs in an open nest, manifest a decided preference for nests
containing eggs similar in colour to their own. The European species
apparently manifests some tendency towards a similar instinct, but not
rarely departs from it, as is shown by her laying her dull and
pale-coloured eggs in the nest of the hedge-warbler with bright
greenish-blue eggs. Had our cuckoo invariably displayed the above
instinct, it would assuredly have been added to those which it is
assumed must all have been acquired together. The eggs of the
Australian bronze cuckoo vary, according to Mr. Ramsay, to an
extraordinary degree in colour; so that in this respect, as well as in
size, natural selection might have secured and fixed any advantageous
variation.

In the case of the European cuckoo, the offspring of the foster-parents
are commonly ejected from the nest within three days after the cuckoo
is hatched; and as the latter at this age is in a most helpless
condition, Mr. Gould was formerly inclined to believe that the act of
ejection was performed by the foster-parents themselves. But he has now
received a trustworthy account of a young cuckoo which was actually
seen, while still blind and not able even to hold up its own head, in
the act of ejecting its foster-brothers. One of these was replaced in
the nest by the observer, and was again thrown out. With respect to the
means by which this strange and odious instinct was acquired, if it
were of great importance for the young cuckoo, as is probably the case,
to receive as much food as possible soon after birth, I can see no
special difficulty in its having gradually acquired, during successive
generations, the blind desire, the strength, and structure necessary
for the work of ejection; for those cuckoos which had such habits and
structure best developed would be the most securely reared. The first
step towards the acquisition of the proper instinct might have been
mere unintentional restlessness on the part of the young bird, when
somewhat advanced in age and strength; the habit having been afterwards
improved, and transmitted to an earlier age. I can see no more
difficulty in this than in the unhatched young of other birds acquiring
the instinct to break through their own shells; or than in young snakes
acquiring in their upper jaws, as Owen has remarked, a transitory sharp
tooth for cutting through the tough egg-shell. For if each part is
liable to individual variations at all ages, and the variations tend to
be inherited at a corresponding or earlier age—propositions which
cannot be disputed—then the instincts and structure of the young could
be slowly modified as surely as those of the adult; and both cases must
stand or fall together with the whole theory of natural selection.

Some species of Molothrus, a widely distinct genus of American birds,
allied to our starlings, have parasitic habits like those of the
cuckoo; and the species present an interesting gradation in the
perfection of their instincts. The sexes of Molothrus badius are stated
by an excellent observer, Mr. Hudson, sometimes to live promiscuously
together in flocks, and sometimes to pair. They either build a nest of
their own or seize on one belonging to some other bird, occasionally
throwing out the nestlings of the stranger. They either lay their eggs
in the nest thus appropriated, or oddly enough build one for themselves
on the top of it. They usually sit on their own eggs and rear their own
young; but Mr. Hudson says it is probable that they are occasionally
parasitic, for he has seen the young of this species following old
birds of a distinct kind and clamouring to be fed by them. The
parasitic habits of another species of Molothrus, the M. bonariensis,
are much more highly developed than those of the last, but are still
far from perfect. This bird, as far as it is known, invariably lays its
eggs in the nests of strangers; but it is remarkable that several
together sometimes commence to build an irregular untidy nest of their
own, placed in singular ill-adapted situations, as on the leaves of a
large thistle. They never, however, as far as Mr. Hudson has
ascertained, complete a nest for themselves. They often lay so many
eggs—from fifteen to twenty—in the same foster-nest, that few or none
can possibly be hatched. They have, moreover, the extraordinary habit
of pecking holes in the eggs, whether of their own species or of their
foster parents, which they find in the appropriated nests. They drop
also many eggs on the bare ground, which are thus wasted. A third
species, the M. pecoris of North America, has acquired instincts as
perfect as those of the cuckoo, for it never lays more than one egg in
a foster-nest, so that the young bird is securely reared. Mr. Hudson is
a strong disbeliever in evolution, but he appears to have been so much
struck by the imperfect instincts of the Molothrus bonariensis that he
quotes my words, and asks, “Must we consider these habits, not as
especially endowed or created instincts, but as small consequences of
one general law, namely, transition?”

Various birds, as has already been remarked, occasionally lay their
eggs in the nests of other birds. This habit is not very uncommon with
the Gallinaceæ, and throws some light on the singular instinct of the
ostrich. In this family several hen birds unite and lay first a few
eggs in one nest and then in another; and these are hatched by the
males. This instinct may probably be accounted for by the fact of the
hens laying a large number of eggs, but, as with the cuckoo, at
intervals of two or three days. The instinct, however, of the American
ostrich, as in the case of the Molothrus bonariensis, has not as yet
been perfected; for a surprising number of eggs lie strewed over the
plains, so that in one day’s hunting I picked up no less than twenty
lost and wasted eggs.

Many bees are parasitic, and regularly lay their eggs in the nests of
other kinds of bees. This case is more remarkable than that of the
cuckoo; for these bees have not only had their instincts but their
structure modified in accordance with their parasitic habits; for they
do not possess the pollen-collecting apparatus which would have been
indispensable if they had stored up food for their own young. Some
species of Sphegidæ (wasp-like insects) are likewise parasitic; and M.
Fabre has lately shown good reason for believing that, although the
Tachytes nigra generally makes its own burrow and stores it with
paralysed prey for its own larvæ, yet that, when this insect finds a
burrow already made and stored by another sphex, it takes advantage of
the prize, and becomes for the occasion parasitic. In this case, as
with that of the Molothrus or cuckoo, I can see no difficulty in
natural selection making an occasional habit permanent, if of advantage
to the species, and if the insect whose nest and stored food are
feloniously appropriated, be not thus exterminated.

_Slave-making instinct._—This remarkable instinct was first discovered
in the Formica (Polyerges) rufescens by Pierre Huber, a better observer
even than his celebrated father. This ant is absolutely dependent on
its slaves; without their aid, the species would certainly become
extinct in a single year. The males and fertile females do no work of
any kind, and the workers or sterile females, though most energetic and
courageous in capturing slaves, do no other work. They are incapable of
making their own nests, or of feeding their own larvæ. When the old
nest is found inconvenient, and they have to migrate, it is the slaves
which determine the migration, and actually carry their masters in
their jaws. So utterly helpless are the masters, that when Huber shut
up thirty of them without a slave, but with plenty of the food which
they like best, and with their larvæ and pupæ to stimulate them to
work, they did nothing; they could not even feed themselves, and many
perished of hunger. Huber then introduced a single slave (F. fusca),
and she instantly set to work, fed and saved the survivors; made some
cells and tended the larvæ, and put all to rights. What can be more
extraordinary than these well-ascertained facts? If we had not known of
any other slave-making ant, it would have been hopeless to speculate
how so wonderful an instinct could have been perfected.

Another species, Formica sanguinea, was likewise first discovered by P.
Huber to be a slave-making ant. This species is found in the southern
parts of England, and its habits have been attended to by Mr. F. Smith,
of the British Museum, to whom I am much indebted for information on
this and other subjects. Although fully trusting to the statements of
Huber and Mr. Smith, I tried to approach the subject in a sceptical
frame of mind, as any one may well be excused for doubting the
existence of so extraordinary an instinct as that of making slaves.
Hence, I will give the observations which I made in some little detail.
I opened fourteen nests of F. sanguinea, and found a few slaves in all.
Males and fertile females of the slave-species (F. fusca) are found
only in their own proper communities, and have never been observed in
the nests of F. sanguinea. The slaves are black and not above half the
size of their red masters, so that the contrast in their appearance is
great. When the nest is slightly disturbed, the slaves occasionally
come out, and like their masters are much agitated and defend the nest:
when the nest is much disturbed, and the larvæ and pupæ are exposed,
the slaves work energetically together with their masters in carrying
them away to a place of safety. Hence, it is clear that the slaves feel
quite at home. During the months of June and July, on three successive
years, I watched for many hours several nests in Surrey and Sussex, and
never saw a slave either leave or enter a nest. As, during these
months, the slaves are very few in number, I thought that they might
behave differently when more numerous; but Mr. Smith informs me that he
has watched the nests at various hours during May, June and August,
both in Surrey and Hampshire, and has never seen the slaves, though
present in large numbers in August, either leave or enter the nest.
Hence, he considers them as strictly household slaves. The masters, on
the other hand, may be constantly seen bringing in materials for the
nest, and food of all kinds. During the year 1860, however, in the
month of July, I came across a community with an unusually large stock
of slaves, and I observed a few slaves mingled with their masters
leaving the nest, and marching along the same road to a tall Scotch-fir
tree, twenty-five yards distant, which they ascended together, probably
in search of aphides or cocci. According to Huber, who had ample
opportunities for observation, the slaves in Switzerland habitually
work with their masters in making the nest, and they alone open and
close the doors in the morning and evening; and, as Huber expressly
states, their principal office is to search for aphides. This
difference in the usual habits of the masters and slaves in the two
countries, probably depends merely on the slaves being captured in
greater numbers in Switzerland than in England.

One day I fortunately witnessed a migration of F. sanguinea from one
nest to another, and it was a most interesting spectacle to behold the
masters carefully carrying their slaves in their jaws instead of being
carried by them, as in the case of F. rufescens. Another day my
attention was struck by about a score of the slave-makers haunting the
same spot, and evidently not in search of food; they approached and
were vigorously repulsed by an independent community of the slave
species (F. fusca); sometimes as many as three of these ants clinging
to the legs of the slave-making F. sanguinea. The latter ruthlessly
killed their small opponents and carried their dead bodies as food to
their nest, twenty-nine yards distant; but they were prevented from
getting any pupæ to rear as slaves. I then dug up a small parcel of the
pupæ of F. fusca from another nest, and put them down on a bare spot
near the place of combat; they were eagerly seized and carried off by
the tyrants, who perhaps fancied that, after all, they had been
victorious in their late combat.

At the same time I laid on the same place a small parcel of the pupæ of
another species, F. flava, with a few of these little yellow ants still
clinging to the fragments of their nest. This species is sometimes,
though rarely, made into slaves, as has been described by Mr. Smith.
Although so small a species, it is very courageous, and I have seen it
ferociously attack other ants. In one instance I found to my surprise
an independent community of F. flava under a stone beneath a nest of
the slave-making F. sanguinea; and when I had accidentally disturbed
both nests, the little ants attacked their big neighbours with
surprising courage. Now I was curious to ascertain whether F. sanguinea
could distinguish the pupæ of F. fusca, which they habitually make into
slaves, from those of the little and furious F. flava, which they
rarely capture, and it was evident that they did at once distinguish
them; for we have seen that they eagerly and instantly seized the pupæ
of F. fusca, whereas they were much terrified when they came across the
pupæ, or even the earth from the nest, of F. flava, and quickly ran
away; but in about a quarter of an hour, shortly after all the little
yellow ants had crawled away, they took heart and carried off the pupæ.

One evening I visited another community of F. sanguinea, and found a
number of these ants returning home and entering their nests, carrying
the dead bodies of F. fusca (showing that it was not a migration) and
numerous pupæ. I traced a long file of ants burthened with booty, for
about forty yards back, to a very thick clump of heath, whence I saw
the last individual of F. sanguinea emerge, carrying a pupa; but I was
not able to find the desolated nest in the thick heath. The nest,
however, must have been close at hand, for two or three individuals of
F. fusca were rushing about in the greatest agitation, and one was
perched motionless with its own pupa in its mouth on the top of a spray
of heath, an image of despair over its ravaged home.

Such are the facts, though they did not need confirmation by me, in
regard to the wonderful instinct of making slaves. Let it be observed
what a contrast the instinctive habits of F. sanguinea present with
those of the continental F. rufescens. The latter does not build its
own nest, does not determine its own migrations, does not collect food
for itself or its young, and cannot even feed itself: it is absolutely
dependent on its numerous slaves. Formica sanguinea, on the other hand,
possesses much fewer slaves, and in the early part of the summer
extremely few. The masters determine when and where a new nest shall be
formed, and when they migrate, the masters carry the slaves. Both in
Switzerland and England the slaves seem to have the exclusive care of
the larvæ, and the masters alone go on slave-making expeditions. In
Switzerland the slaves and masters work together, making and bringing
materials for the nest: both, but chiefly the slaves, tend and milk as
it may be called, their aphides; and thus both collect food for the
community. In England the masters alone usually leave the nest to
collect building materials and food for themselves, their slaves and
larvæ. So that the masters in this country receive much less service
from their slaves than they do in Switzerland.

By what steps the instinct of F. sanguinea originated I will not
pretend to conjecture. But as ants which are not slave-makers, will, as
I have seen, carry off pupæ of other species, if scattered near their
nests, it is possible that such pupæ originally stored as food might
become developed; and the foreign ants thus unintentionally reared
would then follow their proper instincts, and do what work they could.
If their presence proved useful to the species which had seized them—if
it were more advantageous to this species, to capture workers than to
procreate them—the habit of collecting pupæ, originally for food, might
by natural selection be strengthened and rendered permanent for the
very different purpose of raising slaves. When the instinct was once
acquired, if carried out to a much less extent even than in our British
F. sanguinea, which, as we have seen, is less aided by its slaves than
the same species in Switzerland, natural selection might increase and
modify the instinct—always supposing each modification to be of use to
the species—until an ant was formed as abjectly dependent on its slaves
as is the Formica rufescens.

_Cell-making instinct of the Hive-Bee._—I will not here enter on minute
details on this subject, but will merely give an outline of the
conclusions at which I have arrived. He must be a dull man who can
examine the exquisite structure of a comb, so beautifully adapted to
its end, without enthusiastic admiration. We hear from mathematicians
that bees have practically solved a recondite problem, and have made
their cells of the proper shape to hold the greatest possible amount of
honey, with the least possible consumption of precious wax in their
construction. It has been remarked that a skilful workman, with fitting
tools and measures, would find it very difficult to make cells of wax
of the true form, though this is effected by a crowd of bees working in
a dark hive. Granting whatever instincts you please, it seems at first
quite inconceivable how they can make all the necessary angles and
planes, or even perceive when they are correctly made. But the
difficulty is not nearly so great as at first appears: all this
beautiful work can be shown, I think, to follow from a few simple
instincts.

I was led to investigate this subject by Mr. Waterhouse, who has shown
that the form of the cell stands in close relation to the presence of
adjoining cells; and the following view may, perhaps, be considered
only as a modification of his theory. Let us look to the great
principle of gradation, and see whether Nature does not reveal to us
her method of work. At one end of a short series we have humble-bees,
which use their old cocoons to hold honey, sometimes adding to them
short tubes of wax, and likewise making separate and very irregular
rounded cells of wax. At the other end of the series we have the cells
of the hive-bee, placed in a double layer: each cell, as is well known,
is an hexagonal prism, with the basal edges of its six sides bevelled
so as to join an inverted pyramid, of three rhombs. These rhombs have
certain angles, and the three which form the pyramidal base of a single
cell on one side of the comb, enter into the composition of the bases
of three adjoining cells on the opposite side. In the series between
the extreme perfection of the cells of the hive-bee and the simplicity
of those of the humble-bee, we have the cells of the Mexican Melipona
domestica, carefully described and figured by Pierre Huber. The
Melipona itself is intermediate in structure between the hive and
humble bee, but more nearly related to the latter: it forms a nearly
regular waxen comb of cylindrical cells, in which the young are
hatched, and, in addition, some large cells of wax for holding honey.
These latter cells are nearly spherical and of nearly equal sizes, and
are aggregated into an irregular mass. But the important point to
notice is, that these cells are always made at that degree of nearness
to each other that they would have intersected or broken into each
other if the spheres had been completed; but this is never permitted,
the bees building perfectly flat walls of wax between the spheres which
thus tend to intersect. Hence, each cell consists of an outer spherical
portion, and of two, three, or more flat surfaces, according as the
cell adjoins two, three or more other cells. When one cell rests on
three other cells, which, from the spheres being nearly of the same
size, is very frequently and necessarily the case, the three flat
surfaces are united into a pyramid; and this pyramid, as Huber has
remarked, is manifestly a gross imitation of the three-sided pyramidal
base of the cell of the hive-bee. As in the cells of the hive-bee, so
here, the three plane surfaces in any one cell necessarily enter into
the construction of three adjoining cells. It is obvious that the
Melipona saves wax, and what is more important, labour, by this manner
of building; for the flat walls between the adjoining cells are not
double, but are of the same thickness as the outer spherical portions,
and yet each flat portion forms a part of two cells.

Reflecting on this case, it occurred to me that if the Melipona had
made its spheres at some given distance from each other, and had made
them of equal sizes and had arranged them symmetrically in a double
layer, the resulting structure would have been as perfect as the comb
of the hive-bee. Accordingly I wrote to Professor Miller, of Cambridge,
and this geometer has kindly read over the following statement, drawn
up from his information, and tells me that it is strictly correct:—

If a number of equal spheres be described with their centres placed in
two parallel layers; with the centre of each sphere at the distance of
radius x sqrt(2) or radius x 1.41421 (or at some lesser distance), from
the centres of the six surrounding spheres in the same layer; and at
the same distance from the centres of the adjoining spheres in the
other and parallel layer; then, if planes of intersection between the
several spheres in both layers be formed, there will result a double
layer of hexagonal prisms united together by pyramidal bases formed of
three rhombs; and the rhombs and the sides of the hexagonal prisms will
have every angle identically the same with the best measurements which
have been made of the cells of the hive-bee. But I hear from Professor
Wyman, who has made numerous careful measurements, that the accuracy of
the workmanship of the bee has been greatly exaggerated; so much so,
that whatever the typical form of the cell may be, it is rarely, if
ever, realised.

Hence we may safely conclude that, if we could slightly modify the
instincts already possessed by the Melipona, and in themselves not very
wonderful, this bee would make a structure as wonderfully perfect as
that of the hive-bee. We must suppose the Melipona to have the power of
forming her cells truly spherical, and of equal sizes; and this would
not be very surprising, seeing that she already does so to a certain
extent, and seeing what perfectly cylindrical burrows many insects make
in wood, apparently by turning round on a fixed point. We must suppose
the Melipona to arrange her cells in level layers, as she already does
her cylindrical cells; and we must further suppose, and this is the
greatest difficulty, that she can somehow judge accurately at what
distance to stand from her fellow-labourers when several are making
their spheres; but she is already so far enabled to judge of distance,
that she always describes her spheres so as to intersect to a certain
extent; and then she unites the points of intersection by perfectly
flat surfaces. By such modifications of instincts which in themselves
are not very wonderful—hardly more wonderful than those which guide a
bird to make its nest—I believe that the hive-bee has acquired, through
natural selection, her inimitable architectural powers.

But this theory can be tested by experiment. Following the example of
Mr. Tegetmeier, I separated two combs, and put between them a long,
thick, rectangular strip of wax: the bees instantly began to excavate
minute circular pits in it; and as they deepened these little pits,
they made them wider and wider until they were converted into shallow
basins, appearing to the eye perfectly true or parts of a sphere, and
of about the diameter of a cell. It was most interesting to observe
that, wherever several bees had begun to excavate these basins near
together, they had begun their work at such a distance from each other
that by the time the basins had acquired the above stated width (_i.e._
about the width of an ordinary cell), and were in depth about one sixth
of the diameter of the sphere of which they formed a part, the rims of
the basins intersected or broke into each other. As soon as this
occurred, the bees ceased to excavate, and began to build up flat walls
of wax on the lines of intersection between the basins, so that each
hexagonal prism was built upon the scalloped edge of a smooth basin,
instead of on the straight edges of a three-sided pyramid as in the
case of ordinary cells.

I then put into the hive, instead of a thick, rectangular piece of wax,
a thin and narrow, knife-edged ridge, coloured with vermilion. The bees
instantly began on both sides to excavate little basins near to each
other, in the same way as before; but the ridge of wax was so thin,
that the bottoms of the basins, if they had been excavated to the same
depth as in the former experiment, would have broken into each other
from the opposite sides. The bees, however, did not suffer this to
happen, and they stopped their excavations in due time; so that the
basins, as soon as they had been a little deepened, came to have flat
bases; and these flat bases, formed by thin little plates of the
vermilion wax left ungnawed, were situated, as far as the eye could
judge, exactly along the planes of imaginary intersection between the
basins on the opposite side of the ridge of wax. In some parts, only
small portions, in other parts, large portions of a rhombic plate were
thus left between the opposed basins, but the work, from the unnatural
state of things, had not been neatly performed. The bees must have
worked at very nearly the same rate in circularly gnawing away and
deepening the basins on both sides of the ridge of vermilion wax, in
order to have thus succeeded in leaving flat plates between the basins,
by stopping work at the planes of intersection.

Considering how flexible thin wax is, I do not see that there is any
difficulty in the bees, whilst at work on the two sides of a strip of
wax, perceiving when they have gnawed the wax away to the proper
thinness, and then stopping their work. In ordinary combs it has
appeared to me that the bees do not always succeed in working at
exactly the same rate from the opposite sides; for I have noticed
half-completed rhombs at the base of a just-commenced cell, which were
slightly concave on one side, where I suppose that the bees had
excavated too quickly, and convex on the opposed side where the bees
had worked less quickly. In one well-marked instance, I put the comb
back into the hive, and allowed the bees to go on working for a short
time, and again examined the cell, and I found that the rhombic plate
had been completed, and had become _perfectly flat:_ it was absolutely
impossible, from the extreme thinness of the little plate, that they
could have effected this by gnawing away the convex side; and I suspect
that the bees in such cases stand in the opposed cells and push and
bend the ductile and warm wax (which as I have tried is easily done)
into its proper intermediate plane, and thus flatten it.

From the experiment of the ridge of vermilion wax we can see that, if
the bees were to build for themselves a thin wall of wax, they could
make their cells of the proper shape, by standing at the proper
distance from each other, by excavating at the same rate, and by
endeavouring to make equal spherical hollows, but never allowing the
spheres to break into each other. Now bees, as may be clearly seen by
examining the edge of a growing comb, do make a rough, circumferential
wall or rim all round the comb; and they gnaw this away from the
opposite sides, always working circularly as they deepen each cell.
They do not make the whole three-sided pyramidal base of any one cell
at the same time, but only that one rhombic plate which stands on the
extreme growing margin, or the two plates, as the case may be; and they
never complete the upper edges of the rhombic plates, until the
hexagonal walls are commenced. Some of these statements differ from
those made by the justly celebrated elder Huber, but I am convinced of
their accuracy; and if I had space, I could show that they are
conformable with my theory.

Huber’s statement, that the very first cell is excavated out of a
little parallel-sided wall of wax, is not, as far as I have seen,
strictly correct; the first commencement having always been a little
hood of wax; but I will not here enter on details. We see how important
a part excavation plays in the construction of the cells; but it would
be a great error to suppose that the bees cannot build up a rough wall
of wax in the proper position—that is, along the plane of intersection
between two adjoining spheres. I have several specimens showing clearly
that they can do this. Even in the rude circumferential rim or wall of
wax round a growing comb, flexures may sometimes be observed,
corresponding in position to the planes of the rhombic basal plates of
future cells. But the rough wall of wax has in every case to be
finished off, by being largely gnawed away on both sides. The manner in
which the bees build is curious; they always make the first rough wall
from ten to twenty times thicker than the excessively thin finished
wall of the cell, which will ultimately be left. We shall understand
how they work, by supposing masons first to pile up a broad ridge of
cement, and then to begin cutting it away equally on both sides near
the ground, till a smooth, very thin wall is left in the middle; the
masons always piling up the cut-away cement, and adding fresh cement on
the summit of the ridge. We shall thus have a thin wall steadily
growing upward but always crowned by a gigantic coping. From all the
cells, both those just commenced and those completed, being thus
crowned by a strong coping of wax, the bees can cluster and crawl over
the comb without injuring the delicate hexagonal walls. These walls, as
Professor Miller has kindly ascertained for me, vary greatly in
thickness; being, on an average of twelve measurements made near the
border of the comb, 1/353 of an inch in thickness; whereas the basal
rhomboidal plates are thicker, nearly in the proportion of three to
two, having a mean thickness, from twenty-one measurements, of 1/229 of
an inch. By the above singular manner of building, strength is
continually given to the comb, with the utmost ultimate economy of wax.

It seems at first to add to the difficulty of understanding how the
cells are made, that a multitude of bees all work together; one bee
after working a short time at one cell going to another, so that, as
Huber has stated, a score of individuals work even at the commencement
of the first cell. I was able practically to show this fact, by
covering the edges of the hexagonal walls of a single cell, or the
extreme margin of the circumferential rim of a growing comb, with an
extremely thin layer of melted vermilion wax; and I invariably found
that the colour was most delicately diffused by the bees—as delicately
as a painter could have done it with his brush—by atoms of the coloured
wax having been taken from the spot on which it had been placed, and
worked into the growing edges of the cells all round. The work of
construction seems to be a sort of balance struck between many bees,
all instinctively standing at the same relative distance from each
other, all trying to sweep equal spheres, and then building up, or
leaving ungnawed, the planes of intersection between these spheres. It
was really curious to note in cases of difficulty, as when two pieces
of comb met at an angle, how often the bees would pull down and rebuild
in different ways the same cell, sometimes recurring to a shape which
they had at first rejected.

When bees have a place on which they can stand in their proper
positions for working—for instance, on a slip of wood, placed directly
under the middle of a comb growing downwards, so that the comb has to
be built over one face of the slip—in this case the bees can lay the
foundations of one wall of a new hexagon, in its strictly proper place,
projecting beyond the other completed cells. It suffices that the bees
should be enabled to stand at their proper relative distances from each
other and from the walls of the last completed cells, and then, by
striking imaginary spheres, they can build up a wall intermediate
between two adjoining spheres; but, as far as I have seen, they never
gnaw away and finish off the angles of a cell till a large part both of
that cell and of the adjoining cells has been built. This capacity in
bees of laying down under certain circumstances a rough wall in its
proper place between two just-commenced cells, is important, as it
bears on a fact, which seems at first subversive of the foregoing
theory; namely, that the cells on the extreme margin of wasp-combs are
sometimes strictly hexagonal; but I have not space here to enter on
this subject. Nor does there seem to me any great difficulty in a
single insect (as in the case of a queen-wasp) making hexagonal cells,
if she were to work alternately on the inside and outside of two or
three cells commenced at the same time, always standing at the proper
relative distance from the parts of the cells just begun, sweeping
spheres or cylinders, and building up intermediate planes.

As natural selection acts only by the accumulation of slight
modifications of structure or instinct, each profitable to the
individual under its conditions of life, it may reasonably be asked,
how a long and graduated succession of modified architectural
instincts, all tending towards the present perfect plan of
construction, could have profited the progenitors of the hive-bee? I
think the answer is not difficult: cells constructed like those of the
bee or the wasp gain in strength, and save much in labour and space,
and in the materials of which they are constructed. With respect to the
formation of wax, it is known that bees are often hard pressed to get
sufficient nectar; and I am informed by Mr. Tegetmeier that it has been
experimentally proved that from twelve to fifteen pounds of dry sugar
are consumed by a hive of bees for the secretion of a pound of wax; so
that a prodigious quantity of fluid nectar must be collected and
consumed by the bees in a hive for the secretion of the wax necessary
for the construction of their combs. Moreover, many bees have to remain
idle for many days during the process of secretion. A large store of
honey is indispensable to support a large stock of bees during the
winter; and the security of the hive is known mainly to depend on a
large number of bees being supported. Hence the saving of wax by
largely saving honey, and the time consumed in collecting the honey,
must be an important element of success any family of bees. Of course
the success of the species may be dependent on the number of its
enemies, or parasites, or on quite distinct causes, and so be
altogether independent of the quantity of honey which the bees can
collect. But let us suppose that this latter circumstance determined,
as it probably often has determined, whether a bee allied to our
humble-bees could exist in large numbers in any country; and let us
further suppose that the community lived through the winter, and
consequently required a store of honey: there can in this case be no
doubt that it would be an advantage to our imaginary humble-bee if a
slight modification of her instincts led her to make her waxen cells
near together, so as to intersect a little; for a wall in common even
to two adjoining cells would save some little labour and wax. Hence, it
would continually be more and more advantageous to our humble-bees, if
they were to make their cells more and more regular, nearer together,
and aggregated into a mass, like the cells of the Melipona; for in this
case a large part of the bounding surface of each cell would serve to
bound the adjoining cells, and much labour and wax would be saved.
Again, from the same cause, it would be advantageous to the Melipona,
if she were to make her cells closer together, and more regular in
every way than at present; for then, as we have seen, the spherical
surfaces would wholly disappear and be replaced by plane surfaces; and
the Melipona would make a comb as perfect as that of the hive-bee.
Beyond this stage of perfection in architecture, natural selection
could not lead; for the comb of the hive-bee, as far as we can see, is
absolutely perfect in economising labour and wax.

Thus, as I believe, the most wonderful of all known instincts, that of
the hive-bee, can be explained by natural selection having taken
advantage of numerous, successive, slight modifications of simpler
instincts; natural selection having, by slow degrees, more and more
perfectly led the bees to sweep equal spheres at a given distance from
each other in a double layer, and to build up and excavate the wax
along the planes of intersection. The bees, of course, no more knowing
that they swept their spheres at one particular distance from each
other, than they know what are the several angles of the hexagonal
prisms and of the basal rhombic plates; the motive power of the process
of natural selection having been the construction of cells of due
strength and of the proper size and shape for the larvæ, this being
effected with the greatest possible economy of labour and wax; that
individual swarm which thus made the best cells with least labour, and
least waste of honey in the secretion of wax, having succeeded best,
and having transmitted their newly-acquired economical instincts to new
swarms, which in their turn will have had the best chance of succeeding
in the struggle for existence.

_Objections to the Theory of Natural Selection as applied to Instincts:
Neuter and Sterile Insects._

It has been objected to the foregoing view of the origin of instincts
that “the variations of structure and of instinct must have been
simultaneous and accurately adjusted to each other, as a modification
in the one without an immediate corresponding change in the other would
have been fatal.” The force of this objection rests entirely on the
assumption that the changes in the instincts and structure are abrupt.
To take as an illustration the case of the larger titmouse, (Parus
major) alluded to in a previous chapter; this bird often holds the
seeds of the yew between its feet on a branch, and hammers with its
beak till it gets at the kernel. Now what special difficulty would
there be in natural selection preserving all the slight individual
variations in the shape of the beak, which were better and better
adapted to break open the seeds, until a beak was formed, as well
constructed for this purpose as that of the nuthatch, at the same time
that habit, or compulsion, or spontaneous variations of taste, led the
bird to become more and more of a seed-eater? In this case the beak is
supposed to be slowly modified by natural selection, subsequently to,
but in accordance with, slowly changing habits or taste; but let the
feet of the titmouse vary and grow larger from correlation with the
beak, or from any other unknown cause, and it is not improbable that
such larger feet would lead the bird to climb more and more until it
acquired the remarkable climbing instinct and power of the nuthatch. In
this case a gradual change of structure is supposed to lead to changed
instinctive habits. To take one more case: few instincts are more
remarkable than that which leads the swift of the Eastern Islands to
make its nest wholly of inspissated saliva. Some birds build their
nests of mud, believed to be moistened with saliva; and one of the
swifts of North America makes its nest (as I have seen) of sticks
agglutinated with saliva, and even with flakes of this substance. Is it
then very improbable that the natural selection of individual swifts,
which secreted more and more saliva, should at last produce a species
with instincts leading it to neglect other materials and to make its
nest exclusively of inspissated saliva? And so in other cases. It must,
however, be admitted that in many instances we cannot conjecture
whether it was instinct or structure which first varied.

No doubt many instincts of very difficult explanation could be opposed
to the theory of natural selection—cases, in which we cannot see how an
instinct could have originated; cases, in which no intermediate
gradations are known to exist; cases of instincts of such trifling
importance, that they could hardly have been acted on by natural
selection; cases of instincts almost identically the same in animals so
remote in the scale of nature that we cannot account for their
similarity by inheritance from a common progenitor, and consequently
must believe that they were independently acquired through natural
selection. I will not here enter on these several cases, but will
confine myself to one special difficulty, which at first appeared to me
insuperable, and actually fatal to the whole theory. I allude to the
neuters or sterile females in insect communities: for these neuters
often differ widely in instinct and in structure from both the males
and fertile females, and yet, from being sterile, they cannot propagate
their kind.

The subject well deserves to be discussed at great length, but I will
here take only a single case, that of working or sterile ants. How the
workers have been rendered sterile is a difficulty; but not much
greater than that of any other striking modification of structure; for
it can be shown that some insects and other articulate animals in a
state of nature occasionally become sterile; and if such insects had
been social, and it had been profitable to the community that a number
should have been annually born capable of work, but incapable of
procreation, I can see no especial difficulty in this having been
effected through natural selection. But I must pass over this
preliminary difficulty. The great difficulty lies in the working ants
differing widely from both the males and the fertile females in
structure, as in the shape of the thorax, and in being destitute of
wings and sometimes of eyes, and in instinct. As far as instinct alone
is concerned, the wonderful difference in this respect between the
workers and the perfect females would have been better exemplified by
the hive-bee. If a working ant or other neuter insect had been an
ordinary animal, I should have unhesitatingly assumed that all its
characters had been slowly acquired through natural selection; namely,
by individuals having been born with slight profitable modifications,
which were inherited by the offspring, and that these again varied and
again were selected, and so onwards. But with the working ant we have
an insect differing greatly from its parents, yet absolutely sterile;
so that it could never have transmitted successively acquired
modifications of structure or instinct to its progeny. It may well be
asked how it is possible to reconcile this case with the theory of
natural selection?

First, let it be remembered that we have innumerable instances, both in
our domestic productions and in those in a state of nature, of all
sorts of differences of inherited structure which are correlated with
certain ages and with either sex. We have differences correlated not
only with one sex, but with that short period when the reproductive
system is active, as in the nuptial plumage of many birds, and in the
hooked jaws of the male salmon. We have even slight differences in the
horns of different breeds of cattle in relation to an artificially
imperfect state of the male sex; for oxen of certain breeds have longer
horns than the oxen of other breeds, relatively to the length of the
horns in both the bulls and cows of these same breeds. Hence, I can see
no great difficulty in any character becoming correlated with the
sterile condition of certain members of insect communities; the
difficulty lies in understanding how such correlated modifications of
structure could have been slowly accumulated by natural selection.

This difficulty, though appearing insuperable, is lessened, or, as I
believe, disappears, when it is remembered that selection may be
applied to the family, as well as to the individual, and may thus gain
the desired end. Breeders of cattle wish the flesh and fat to be well
marbled together. An animal thus characterized has been slaughtered,
but the breeder has gone with confidence to the same stock and has
succeeded. Such faith may be placed in the power of selection that a
breed of cattle, always yielding oxen with extraordinarily long horns,
could, it is probable, be formed by carefully watching which individual
bulls and cows, when matched, produced oxen with the longest horns; and
yet no one ox would ever have propagated its kind. Here is a better and
real illustration: According to M. Verlot, some varieties of the double
annual stock, from having been long and carefully selected to the right
degree, always produce a large proportion of seedlings bearing double
and quite sterile flowers, but they likewise yield some single and
fertile plants. These latter, by which alone the variety can be
propagated, may be compared with the fertile male and female ants, and
the double sterile plants with the neuters of the same community. As
with the varieties of the stock, so with social insects, selection has
been applied to the family, and not to the individual, for the sake of
gaining a serviceable end. Hence, we may conclude that slight
modifications of structure or of instinct, correlated with the sterile
condition of certain members of the community, have proved
advantageous; consequently the fertile males and females have
flourished, and transmitted to their fertile offspring a tendency to
produce sterile members with the same modifications. This process must
have been repeated many times, until that prodigious amount of
difference between the fertile and sterile females of the same species
has been produced which we see in many social insects.

But we have not as yet touched on the acme of the difficulty; namely,
the fact that the neuters of several ants differ, not only from the
fertile females and males, but from each other, sometimes to an almost
incredible degree, and are thus divided into two or even three castes.
The castes, moreover, do not generally graduate into each other, but
are perfectly well defined; being as distinct from each other as are
any two species of the same genus, or rather as any two genera of the
same family. Thus, in Eciton, there are working and soldier neuters,
with jaws and instincts extraordinarily different: in Cryptocerus, the
workers of one caste alone carry a wonderful sort of shield on their
heads, the use of which is quite unknown: in the Mexican Myrmecocystus,
the workers of one caste never leave the nest; they are fed by the
workers of another caste, and they have an enormously developed abdomen
which secretes a sort of honey, supplying the place of that excreted by
the aphides, or the domestic cattle as they may be called, which our
European ants guard and imprison.

It will indeed be thought that I have an overweening confidence in the
principle of natural selection, when I do not admit that such wonderful
and well-established facts at once annihilate the theory. In the
simpler case of neuter insects all of one caste, which, as I believe,
have been rendered different from the fertile males and females through
natural selection, we may conclude from the analogy of ordinary
variations, that the successive, slight, profitable modifications did
not first arise in all the neuters in the same nest, but in some few
alone; and that by the survival of the communities with females which
produced most neuters having the advantageous modification, all the
neuters ultimately came to be thus characterized. According to this
view we ought occasionally to find in the same nest neuter-insects,
presenting gradations of structure; and this we do find, even not
rarely, considering how few neuter-insects out of Europe have been
carefully examined. Mr. F. Smith has shown that the neuters of several
British ants differ surprisingly from each other in size and sometimes
in colour; and that the extreme forms can be linked together by
individuals taken out of the same nest: I have myself compared perfect
gradations of this kind. It sometimes happens that the larger or the
smaller sized workers are the most numerous; or that both large and
small are numerous, while those of an intermediate size are scanty in
numbers. Formica flava has larger and smaller workers, with some few of
intermediate size; and, in this species, as Mr. F. Smith has observed,
the larger workers have simple eyes (ocelli), which, though small, can
be plainly distinguished, whereas the smaller workers have their ocelli
rudimentary. Having carefully dissected several specimens of these
workers, I can affirm that the eyes are far more rudimentary in the
smaller workers than can be accounted for merely by their
proportionately lesser size; and I fully believe, though I dare not
assert so positively, that the workers of intermediate size have their
ocelli in an exactly intermediate condition. So that here we have two
bodies of sterile workers in the same nest, differing not only in size,
but in their organs of vision, yet connected by some few members in an
intermediate condition. I may digress by adding, that if the smaller
workers had been the most useful to the community, and those males and
females had been continually selected, which produced more and more of
the smaller workers, until all the workers were in this condition; we
should then have had a species of ant with neuters in nearly the same
condition as those of Myrmica. For the workers of Myrmica have not even
rudiments of ocelli, though the male and female ants of this genus have
well-developed ocelli.

I may give one other case: so confidently did I expect occasionally to
find gradations of important structures between the different castes of
neuters in the same species, that I gladly availed myself of Mr. F.
Smith’s offer of numerous specimens from the same nest of the driver
ant (Anomma) of West Africa. The reader will perhaps best appreciate
the amount of difference in these workers by my giving, not the actual
measurements, but a strictly accurate illustration: the difference was
the same as if we were to see a set of workmen building a house, of
whom many were five feet four inches high, and many sixteen feet high;
but we must in addition suppose that the larger workmen had heads four
instead of three times as big as those of the smaller men, and jaws
nearly five times as big. The jaws, moreover, of the working ants of
the several sizes differed wonderfully in shape, and in the form and
number of the teeth. But the important fact for us is that, though the
workers can be grouped into castes of different sizes, yet they
graduate insensibly into each other, as does the widely-different
structure of their jaws. I speak confidently on this latter point, as
Sir J. Lubbock made drawings for me, with the camera lucida, of the
jaws which I dissected from the workers of the several sizes. Mr.
Bates, in his interesting “Naturalist on the Amazons,” has described
analogous cases.

With these facts before me, I believe that natural selection, by acting
on the fertile ants or parents, could form a species which should
regularly produce neuters, all of large size with one form of jaw, or
all of small size with widely different jaws; or lastly, and this is
the greatest difficulty, one set of workers of one size and structure,
and simultaneously another set of workers of a different size and
structure; a graduated series having first been formed, as in the case
of the driver ant, and then the extreme forms having been produced in
greater and greater numbers, through the survival of the parents which
generated them, until none with an intermediate structure were
produced.

An analogous explanation has been given by Mr. Wallace, of the equally
complex case, of certain Malayan butterflies regularly appearing under
two or even three distinct female forms; and by Fritz Müller, of
certain Brazilian crustaceans likewise appearing under two widely
distinct male forms. But this subject need not here be discussed.

I have now explained how, I believe, the wonderful fact of two
distinctly defined castes of sterile workers existing in the same nest,
both widely different from each other and from their parents, has
originated. We can see how useful their production may have been to a
social community of ants, on the same principle that the division of
labour is useful to civilised man. Ants, however, work by inherited
instincts and by inherited organs or tools, while man works by acquired
knowledge and manufactured instruments. But I must confess, that, with
all my faith in natural selection, I should never have anticipated that
this principle could have been efficient in so high a degree, had not
the case of these neuter insects led me to this conclusion. I have,
therefore, discussed this case, at some little but wholly insufficient
length, in order to show the power of natural selection, and likewise
because this is by far the most serious special difficulty which my
theory has encountered. The case, also, is very interesting, as it
proves that with animals, as with plants, any amount of modification
may be effected by the accumulation of numerous, slight, spontaneous
variations, which are in any way profitable, without exercise or habit
having been brought into play. For peculiar habits, confined to the
workers of sterile females, however long they might be followed, could
not possibly affect the males and fertile females, which alone leave
descendants. I am surprised that no one has advanced this demonstrative
case of neuter insects, against the well-known doctrine of inherited
habit, as advanced by Lamarck.

_Summary._

I have endeavoured in this chapter briefly to show that the mental
qualities of our domestic animals vary, and that the variations are
inherited. Still more briefly I have attempted to show that instincts
vary slightly in a state of nature. No one will dispute that instincts
are of the highest importance to each animal. Therefore, there is no
real difficulty, under changing conditions of life, in natural
selection accumulating to any extent slight modifications of instinct
which are in any way useful. In many cases habit or use and disuse have
probably come into play. I do not pretend that the facts given in this
chapter strengthen in any great degree my theory; but none of the cases
of difficulty, to the best of my judgment, annihilate it. On the other
hand, the fact that instincts are not always absolutely perfect and are
liable to mistakes;—that no instinct can be shown to have been produced
for the good of other animals, though animals take advantage of the
instincts of others;—that the canon in natural history, of “Natura non
facit saltum,” is applicable to instincts as well as to corporeal
structure, and is plainly explicable on the foregoing views, but is
otherwise inexplicable—all tend to corroborate the theory of natural
selection.

This theory is also strengthened by some few other facts in regard to
instincts; as by that common case of closely allied, but distinct,
species, when inhabiting distant parts of the world and living under
considerably different conditions of life, yet often retaining nearly
the same instincts. For instance, we can understand, on the principle
of inheritance, how it is that the thrush of tropical South America
lines its nest with mud, in the same peculiar manner as does our
British thrush; how it is that the Hornbills of Africa and India have
the same extraordinary instinct of plastering up and imprisoning the
females in a hole in a tree, with only a small hole left in the plaster
through which the males feed them and their young when hatched; how it
is that the male wrens (Troglodytes) of North America, build
“cock-nests,” to roost in, like the males of our Kitty-wrens,—a habit
wholly unlike that of any other known bird. Finally, it may not be a
logical deduction, but to my imagination it is far more satisfactory to
look at such instincts as the young cuckoo ejecting its
foster-brothers, ants making slaves, the larvæ of ichneumonidæ feeding
within the live bodies of caterpillars, not as specially endowed or
created instincts, but as small consequences of one general law leading
to the advancement of all organic beings—namely, multiply, vary, let
the strongest live and the weakest die.

CHAPTER IX.
HYBRIDISM.

Distinction between the sterility of first crosses and of
hybrids—Sterility various in degree, not universal, affected by close
interbreeding, removed by domestication—Laws governing the sterility of
hybrids—Sterility not a special endowment, but incidental on other
differences, not accumulated by natural selection—Causes of the
sterility of first crosses and of hybrids—Parallelism between the
effects of changed conditions of life and of crossing—Dimorphism and
trimorphism—Fertility of varieties when crossed and of their mongrel
offspring not universal—Hybrids and mongrels compared independently of
their fertility—Summary.

The view commonly entertained by naturalists is that species, when
intercrossed, have been specially endowed with sterility, in order to
prevent their confusion. This view certainly seems at first highly
probable, for species living together could hardly have been kept
distinct had they been capable of freely crossing. The subject is in
many ways important for us, more especially as the sterility of species
when first crossed, and that of their hybrid offspring, cannot have
been acquired, as I shall show, by the preservation of successive
profitable degrees of sterility. It is an incidental result of
differences in the reproductive systems of the parent-species.

In treating this subject, two classes of facts, to a large extent
fundamentally different, have generally been confounded; namely, the
sterility of species when first crossed, and the sterility of the
hybrids produced from them.

Pure species have of course their organs of reproduction in a perfect
condition, yet when intercrossed they produce either few or no
offspring. Hybrids, on the other hand, have their reproductive organs
functionally impotent, as may be clearly seen in the state of the male
element in both plants and animals; though the formative organs
themselves are perfect in structure, as far as the microscope reveals.
In the first case the two sexual elements which go to form the embryo
are perfect; in the second case they are either not at all developed,
or are imperfectly developed. This distinction is important, when the
cause of the sterility, which is common to the two cases, has to be
considered. The distinction probably has been slurred over, owing to
the sterility in both cases being looked on as a special endowment,
beyond the province of our reasoning powers.

The fertility of varieties, that is of the forms known or believed to
be descended from common parents, when crossed, and likewise the
fertility of their mongrel offspring, is, with reference to my theory,
of equal importance with the sterility of species; for it seems to make
a broad and clear distinction between varieties and species.

_Degrees of Sterility._—First, for the sterility of species when
crossed and of their hybrid offspring. It is impossible to study the
several memoirs and works of those two conscientious and admirable
observers, Kölreuter and Gärtner, who almost devoted their lives to
this subject, without being deeply impressed with the high generality
of some degree of sterility. Kölreuter makes the rule universal; but
then he cuts the knot, for in ten cases in which he found two forms,
considered by most authors as distinct species, quite fertile together,
he unhesitatingly ranks them as varieties. Gärtner, also, makes the
rule equally universal; and he disputes the entire fertility of
Kölreuter’s ten cases. But in these and in many other cases, Gärtner is
obliged carefully to count the seeds, in order to show that there is
any degree of sterility. He always compares the maximum number of seeds
produced by two species when first crossed, and the maximum produced by
their hybrid offspring, with the average number produced by both pure
parent-species in a state of nature. But causes of serious error here
intervene: a plant, to be hybridised, must be castrated, and, what is
often more important, must be secluded in order to prevent pollen being
brought to it by insects from other plants. Nearly all the plants
experimented on by Gärtner were potted, and were kept in a chamber in
his house. That these processes are often injurious to the fertility of
a plant cannot be doubted; for Gärtner gives in his table about a score
of cases of plants which he castrated, and artificially fertilised with
their own pollen, and (excluding all cases such as the Leguminosæ, in
which there is an acknowledged difficulty in the manipulation) half of
these twenty plants had their fertility in some degree impaired.
Moreover, as Gärtner repeatedly crossed some forms, such as the common
red and blue pimpernels (Anagallis arvensis and coerulea), which the
best botanists rank as varieties, and found them absolutely sterile, we
may doubt whether many species are really so sterile, when
intercrossed, as he believed.

It is certain, on the one hand, that the sterility of various species
when crossed is so different in degree and graduates away so
insensibly, and, on the other hand, that the fertility of pure species
is so easily affected by various circumstances, that for all practical
purposes it is most difficult to say where perfect fertility ends and
sterility begins. I think no better evidence of this can be required
than that the two most experienced observers who have ever lived,
namely Kölreuter and Gärtner, arrived at diametrically opposite
conclusions in regard to some of the very same forms. It is also most
instructive to compare—but I have not space here to enter on
details—the evidence advanced by our best botanists on the question
whether certain doubtful forms should be ranked as species or
varieties, with the evidence from fertility adduced by different
hybridisers, or by the same observer from experiments made during
different years. It can thus be shown that neither sterility nor
fertility affords any certain distinction between species and
varieties. The evidence from this source graduates away, and is
doubtful in the same degree as is the evidence derived from other
constitutional and structural differences.

In regard to the sterility of hybrids in successive generations; though
Gärtner was enabled to rear some hybrids, carefully guarding them from
a cross with either pure parent, for six or seven, and in one case for
ten generations, yet he asserts positively that their fertility never
increases, but generally decreases greatly and suddenly. With respect
to this decrease, it may first be noticed that when any deviation in
structure or constitution is common to both parents, this is often
transmitted in an augmented degree to the offspring; and both sexual
elements in hybrid plants are already affected in some degree. But I
believe that their fertility has been diminished in nearly all these
cases by an independent cause, namely, by too close interbreeding. I
have made so many experiments and collected so many facts, showing on
the one hand that an occasional cross with a distinct individual or
variety increases the vigour and fertility of the offspring, and on the
other hand that very close interbreeding lessens their vigour and
fertility, that I cannot doubt the correctness of this conclusion.
Hybrids are seldom raised by experimentalists in great numbers; and as
the parent-species, or other allied hybrids, generally grow in the same
garden, the visits of insects must be carefully prevented during the
flowering season: hence hybrids, if left to themselves, will generally
be fertilised during each generation by pollen from the same flower;
and this would probably be injurious to their fertility, already
lessened by their hybrid origin. I am strengthened in this conviction
by a remarkable statement repeatedly made by Gärtner, namely, that if
even the less fertile hybrids be artificially fertilised with hybrid
pollen of the same kind, their fertility, notwithstanding the frequent
ill effects from manipulation, sometimes decidedly increases, and goes
on increasing. Now, in the process of artificial fertilisation, pollen
is as often taken by chance (as I know from my own experience) from the
anthers of another flower, as from the anthers of the flower itself
which is to be fertilised; so that a cross between two flowers, though
probably often on the same plant, would be thus effected. Moreover,
whenever complicated experiments are in progress, so careful an
observer as Gärtner would have castrated his hybrids, and this would
have insured in each generation a cross with pollen from a distinct
flower, either from the same plant or from another plant of the same
hybrid nature. And thus, the strange fact of an increase of fertility
in the successive generations of _artificially fertilised_ hybrids, in
contrast with those spontaneously self-fertilised, may, as I believe,
be accounted for by too close interbreeding having been avoided.

Now let us turn to the results arrived at by a third most experienced
hybridiser, namely, the Hon. and Rev. W. Herbert. He is as emphatic in
his conclusion that some hybrids are perfectly fertile—as fertile as
the pure parent-species—as are Kölreuter and Gärtner that some degree
of sterility between distinct species is a universal law of nature. He
experimented on some of the very same species as did Gärtner. The
difference in their results may, I think, be in part accounted for by
Herbert’s great horticultural skill, and by his having hot-houses at
his command. Of his many important statements I will here give only a
single one as an example, namely, that “every ovule in a pod of Crinum
capense fertilised by C. revolutum produced a plant, which I never saw
to occur in a case of its natural fecundation.” So that here we have
perfect, or even more than commonly perfect fertility, in a first cross
between two distinct species.

This case of the Crinum leads me to refer to a singular fact, namely,
that individual plants of certain species of Lobelia, Verbascum and
Passiflora, can easily be fertilised by the pollen from a distinct
species, but not by pollen from the same plant, though this pollen can
be proved to be perfectly sound by fertilising other plants or species.
In the genus Hippeastrum, in Corydalis as shown by Professor
Hildebrand, in various orchids as shown by Mr. Scott and Fritz Müller,
all the individuals are in this peculiar condition. So that with some
species, certain abnormal individuals, and in other species all the
individuals, can actually be hybridised much more readily than they can
be fertilised by pollen from the same individual plant! To give one
instance, a bulb of Hippeastrum aulicum produced four flowers; three
were fertilised by Herbert with their own pollen, and the fourth was
subsequently fertilised by the pollen of a compound hybrid descended
from three distinct species: the result was that “the ovaries of the
three first flowers soon ceased to grow, and after a few days perished
entirely, whereas the pod impregnated by the pollen of the hybrid made
vigorous growth and rapid progress to maturity, and bore good seed,
which vegetated freely.” Mr. Herbert tried similar experiments during
many years, and always with the same result. These cases serve to show
on what slight and mysterious causes the lesser or greater fertility of
a species sometimes depends.

The practical experiments of horticulturists, though not made with
scientific precision, deserve some notice. It is notorious in how
complicated a manner the species of Pelargonium, Fuchsia, Calceolaria,
Petunia, Rhododendron, &c., have been crossed, yet many of these
hybrids seed freely. For instance, Herbert asserts that a hybrid from
Calceolaria integrifolia and plantaginea, species most widely
dissimilar in general habit, “reproduces itself as perfectly as if it
had been a natural species from the mountains of Chile.” I have taken
some pains to ascertain the degree of fertility of some of the complex
crosses of Rhododendrons, and I am assured that many of them are
perfectly fertile. Mr. C. Noble, for instance, informs me that he
raises stocks for grafting from a hybrid between Rhod. ponticum and
catawbiense, and that this hybrid “seeds as freely as it is possible to
imagine.” Had hybrids, when fairly treated, always gone on decreasing
in fertility in each successive generation, as Gärtner believed to be
the case, the fact would have been notorious to nurserymen.
Horticulturists raise large beds of the same hybrid, and such alone are
fairly treated, for by insect agency the several individuals are
allowed to cross freely with each other, and the injurious influence of
close interbreeding is thus prevented. Any one may readily convince
himself of the efficiency of insect agency by examining the flowers of
the more sterile kinds of hybrid Rhododendrons, which produce no
pollen, for he will find on their stigmas plenty of pollen brought from
other flowers.

In regard to animals, much fewer experiments have been carefully tried
than with plants. If our systematic arrangements can be trusted, that
is, if the genera of animals are as distinct from each other as are the
genera of plants, then we may infer that animals more widely distinct
in the scale of nature can be crossed more easily than in the case of
plants; but the hybrids themselves are, I think, more sterile. It
should, however, be borne in mind that, owing to few animals breeding
freely under confinement, few experiments have been fairly tried: for
instance, the canary-bird has been crossed with nine distinct species
of finches, but, as not one of these breeds freely in confinement, we
have no right to expect that the first crosses between them and the
canary, or that their hybrids, should be perfectly fertile. Again, with
respect to the fertility in successive generations of the more fertile
hybrid animals, I hardly know of an instance in which two families of
the same hybrid have been raised at the same time from different
parents, so as to avoid the ill effects of close interbreeding. On the
contrary, brothers and sisters have usually been crossed in each
successive generation, in opposition to the constantly repeated
admonition of every breeder. And in this case, it is not at all
surprising that the inherent sterility in the hybrids should have gone
on increasing.

Although I know of hardly any thoroughly well-authenticated cases of
perfectly fertile hybrid animals, I have reason to believe that the
hybrids from Cervulus vaginalis and Reevesii, and from Phasianus
colchicus with P. torquatus, are perfectly fertile. M. Quatrefages
states that the hybrids from two moths (Bombyx cynthia and arrindia)
were proved in Paris to be fertile _inter se_ for eight generations. It
has lately been asserted that two such distinct species as the hare and
rabbit, when they can be got to breed together, produce offspring,
which are highly fertile when crossed with one of the parent-species.
The hybrids from the common and Chinese geese (A. cygnoides), species
which are so different that they are generally ranked in distinct
genera, have often bred in this country with either pure parent, and in
one single instance they have bred _inter se_. This was effected by Mr.
Eyton, who raised two hybrids from the same parents, but from different
hatches; and from these two birds he raised no less than eight hybrids
(grandchildren of the pure geese) from one nest. In India, however,
these cross-bred geese must be far more fertile; for I am assured by
two eminently capable judges, namely Mr. Blyth and Captain Hutton, that
whole flocks of these crossed geese are kept in various parts of the
country; and as they are kept for profit, where neither pure
parent-species exists, they must certainly be highly or perfectly
fertile.

With our domesticated animals, the various races when crossed together
are quite fertile; yet in many cases they are descended from two or
more wild species. From this fact we must conclude either that the
aboriginal parent-species at first produced perfectly fertile hybrids,
or that the hybrids subsequently reared under domestication became
quite fertile. This latter alternative, which was first propounded by
Pallas, seems by far the most probable, and can, indeed, hardly be
doubted. It is, for instance, almost certain that our dogs are
descended from several wild stocks; yet, with perhaps the exception of
certain indigenous domestic dogs of South America, all are quite
fertile together; but analogy makes me greatly doubt, whether the
several aboriginal species would at first have freely bred together and
have produced quite fertile hybrids. So again I have lately acquired
decisive evidence that the crossed offspring from the Indian humped and
common cattle are inter se perfectly fertile; and from the observations
by Rütimeyer on their important osteological differences, as well as
from those by Mr. Blyth on their differences in habits, voice,
constitution, &c., these two forms must be regarded as good and
distinct species. The same remarks may be extended to the two chief
races of the pig. We must, therefore, either give up the belief of the
universal sterility of species when crossed; or we must look at this
sterility in animals, not as an indelible characteristic, but as one
capable of being removed by domestication.

Finally, considering all the ascertained facts on the intercrossing of
plants and animals, it may be concluded that some degree of sterility,
both in first crosses and in hybrids, is an extremely general result;
but that it cannot, under our present state of knowledge, be considered
as absolutely universal.

_Laws governing the Sterility of first Crosses and of Hybrids._

We will now consider a little more in detail the laws governing the
sterility of first crosses and of hybrids. Our chief object will be to
see whether or not these laws indicate that species have been specially
endowed with this quality, in order to prevent their crossing and
blending together in utter confusion. The following conclusions are
drawn up chiefly from Gärtner’s admirable work on the hybridisation of
plants. I have taken much pains to ascertain how far they apply to
animals, and, considering how scanty our knowledge is in regard to
hybrid animals, I have been surprised to find how generally the same
rules apply to both kingdoms.

It has been already remarked, that the degree of fertility, both of
first crosses and of hybrids, graduates from zero to perfect fertility.
It is surprising in how many curious ways this gradation can be shown;
but only the barest outline of the facts can here be given. When pollen
from a plant of one family is placed on the stigma of a plant of a
distinct family, it exerts no more influence than so much inorganic
dust. From this absolute zero of fertility, the pollen of different
species applied to the stigma of some one species of the same genus,
yields a perfect gradation in the number of seeds produced, up to
nearly complete or even quite complete fertility; and, as we have seen,
in certain abnormal cases, even to an excess of fertility, beyond that
which the plant’s own pollen produces. So in hybrids themselves, there
are some which never have produced, and probably never would produce,
even with the pollen of the pure parents, a single fertile seed: but in
some of these cases a first trace of fertility may be detected, by the
pollen of one of the pure parent-species causing the flower of the
hybrid to wither earlier than it otherwise would have done; and the
early withering of the flower is well known to be a sign of incipient
fertilisation. From this extreme degree of sterility we have
self-fertilised hybrids producing a greater and greater number of seeds
up to perfect fertility.

The hybrids raised from two species which are very difficult to cross,
and which rarely produce any offspring, are generally very sterile; but
the parallelism between the difficulty of making a first cross, and the
sterility of the hybrids thus produced—two classes of facts which are
generally confounded together—is by no means strict. There are many
cases, in which two pure species, as in the genus Verbascum, can be
united with unusual facility, and produce numerous hybrid offspring,
yet these hybrids are remarkably sterile. On the other hand, there are
species which can be crossed very rarely, or with extreme difficulty,
but the hybrids, when at last produced, are very fertile. Even within
the limits of the same genus, for instance in Dianthus, these two
opposite cases occur.

The fertility, both of first crosses and of hybrids, is more easily
affected by unfavourable conditions, than is that of pure species. But
the fertility of first crosses is likewise innately variable; for it is
not always the same in degree when the same two species are crossed
under the same circumstances; it depends in part upon the constitution
of the individuals which happen to have been chosen for the experiment.
So it is with hybrids, for their degree of fertility is often found to
differ greatly in the several individuals raised from seed out of the
same capsule and exposed to the same conditions.

By the term systematic affinity is meant, the general resemblance
between species in structure and constitution. Now the fertility of
first crosses, and of the hybrids produced from them, is largely
governed by their systematic affinity. This is clearly shown by hybrids
never having been raised between species ranked by systematists in
distinct families; and on the other hand, by very closely allied
species generally uniting with facility. But the correspondence between
systematic affinity and the facility of crossing is by no means strict.
A multitude of cases could be given of very closely allied species
which will not unite, or only with extreme difficulty; and on the other
hand of very distinct species which unite with the utmost facility. In
the same family there may be a genus, as Dianthus, in which very many
species can most readily be crossed; and another genus, as Silene, in
which the most persevering efforts have failed to produce between
extremely close species a single hybrid. Even within the limits of the
same genus, we meet with this same difference; for instance, the many
species of Nicotiana have been more largely crossed than the species of
almost any other genus; but Gärtner found that N. acuminata, which is
not a particularly distinct species, obstinately failed to fertilise,
or to be fertilised, by no less than eight other species of Nicotiana.
Many analogous facts could be given.

No one has been able to point out what kind or what amount of
difference, in any recognisable character, is sufficient to prevent two
species crossing. It can be shown that plants most widely different in
habit and general appearance, and having strongly marked differences in
every part of the flower, even in the pollen, in the fruit, and in the
cotyledons, can be crossed. Annual and perennial plants, deciduous and
evergreen trees, plants inhabiting different stations and fitted for
extremely different climates, can often be crossed with ease.

By a reciprocal cross between two species, I mean the case, for
instance, of a female-ass being first crossed by a stallion, and then a
mare by a male-ass: these two species may then be said to have been
reciprocally crossed. There is often the widest possible difference in
the facility of making reciprocal crosses. Such cases are highly
important, for they prove that the capacity in any two species to cross
is often completely independent of their systematic affinity, that is
of any difference in their structure or constitution, excepting in
their reproductive systems. The diversity of the result in reciprocal
crosses between the same two species was long ago observed by
Kölreuter. To give an instance: Mirabilis jalapa can easily be
fertilised by the pollen of M. longiflora, and the hybrids thus
produced are sufficiently fertile; but Kölreuter tried more than two
hundred times, during eight following years, to fertilise reciprocally
M. longiflora with the pollen of M. jalapa, and utterly failed. Several
other equally striking cases could be given. Thuret has observed the
same fact with certain sea-weeds or Fuci. Gärtner, moreover, found that
this difference of facility in making reciprocal crosses is extremely
common in a lesser degree. He has observed it even between closely
related forms (as Matthiola annua and glabra) which many botanists rank
only as varieties. It is also a remarkable fact that hybrids raised
from reciprocal crosses, though of course compounded of the very same
two species, the one species having first been used as the father and
then as the mother, though they rarely differ in external characters,
yet generally differ in fertility in a small, and occasionally in a
high degree.

Several other singular rules could be given from Gärtner: for instance,
some species have a remarkable power of crossing with other species;
other species of the same genus have a remarkable power of impressing
their likeness on their hybrid offspring; but these two powers do not
at all necessarily go together. There are certain hybrids which,
instead of having, as is usual, an intermediate character between their
two parents, always closely resemble one of them; and such hybrids,
though externally so like one of their pure parent-species, are with
rare exceptions extremely sterile. So again among hybrids which are
usually intermediate in structure between their parents, exceptional
and abnormal individuals sometimes are born, which closely resemble one
of their pure parents; and these hybrids are almost always utterly
sterile, even when the other hybrids raised from seed from the same
capsule have a considerable degree of fertility. These facts show how
completely the fertility of a hybrid may be independent of its external
resemblance to either pure parent.

Considering the several rules now given, which govern the fertility of
first crosses and of hybrids, we see that when forms, which must be
considered as good and distinct species, are united, their fertility
graduates from zero to perfect fertility, or even to fertility under
certain conditions in excess; that their fertility, besides being
eminently susceptible to favourable and unfavourable conditions, is
innately variable; that it is by no means always the same in degree in
the first cross and in the hybrids produced from this cross; that the
fertility of hybrids is not related to the degree in which they
resemble in external appearance either parent; and lastly, that the
facility of making a first cross between any two species is not always
governed by their systematic affinity or degree of resemblance to each
other. This latter statement is clearly proved by the difference in the
result of reciprocal crosses between the same two species, for,
according as the one species or the other is used as the father or the
mother, there is generally some difference, and occasionally the widest
possible difference, in the facility of effecting an union. The
hybrids, moreover, produced from reciprocal crosses often differ in
fertility.

Now do these complex and singular rules indicate that species have been
endowed with sterility simply to prevent their becoming confounded in
nature? I think not. For why should the sterility be so extremely
different in degree, when various species are crossed, all of which we
must suppose it would be equally important to keep from blending
together? Why should the degree of sterility be innately variable in
the individuals of the same species? Why should some species cross with
facility and yet produce very sterile hybrids; and other species cross
with extreme difficulty, and yet produce fairly fertile hybrids? Why
should there often be so great a difference in the result of a
reciprocal cross between the same two species? Why, it may even be
asked, has the production of hybrids been permitted? To grant to
species the special power of producing hybrids, and then to stop their
further propagation by different degrees of sterility, not strictly
related to the facility of the first union between their parents, seems
a strange arrangement.

The foregoing rules and facts, on the other hand, appear to me clearly
to indicate that the sterility, both of first crosses and of hybrids,
is simply incidental or dependent on unknown differences in their
reproductive systems; the differences being of so peculiar and limited
a nature, that, in reciprocal crosses between the same two species, the
male sexual element of the one will often freely act on the female
sexual element of the other, but not in a reversed direction. It will
be advisable to explain a little more fully, by an example, what I mean
by sterility being incidental on other differences, and not a specially
endowed quality. As the capacity of one plant to be grafted or budded
on another is unimportant for their welfare in a state of nature, I
presume that no one will suppose that this capacity is a _specially_
endowed quality, but will admit that it is incidental on differences in
the laws of growth of the two plants. We can sometimes see the reason
why one tree will not take on another from differences in their rate of
growth, in the hardness of their wood, in the period of the flow or
nature of their sap, &c.; but in a multitude of cases we can assign no
reason whatever. Great diversity in the size of two plants, one being
woody and the other herbaceous, one being evergreen and the other
deciduous, and adaptation to widely different climates, does not always
prevent the two grafting together. As in hybridisation, so with
grafting, the capacity is limited by systematic affinity, for no one
has been able to graft together trees belonging to quite distinct
families; and, on the other hand, closely allied species and varieties
of the same species, can usually, but not invariably, be grafted with
ease. But this capacity, as in hybridisation, is by no means absolutely
governed by systematic affinity. Although many distinct genera within
the same family have been grafted together, in other cases species of
the same genus will not take on each other. The pear can be grafted far
more readily on the quince, which is ranked as a distinct genus, than
on the apple, which is a member of the same genus. Even different
varieties of the pear take with different degrees of facility on the
quince; so do different varieties of the apricot and peach on certain
varieties of the plum.

As Gärtner found that there was sometimes an innate difference in
different _individuals_ of the same two species in crossing; so Sagaret
believes this to be the case with different individuals of the same two
species in being grafted together. As in reciprocal crosses, the
facility of effecting an union is often very far from equal, so it
sometimes is in grafting. The common gooseberry, for instance, cannot
be grafted on the currant, whereas the currant will take, though with
difficulty, on the gooseberry.

We have seen that the sterility of hybrids which have their
reproductive organs in an imperfect condition, is a different case from
the difficulty of uniting two pure species, which have their
reproductive organs perfect; yet these two distinct classes of cases
run to a large extent parallel. Something analogous occurs in grafting;
for Thouin found that three species of Robinia, which seeded freely on
their own roots, and which could be grafted with no great difficulty on
a fourth species, when thus grafted were rendered barren. On the other
hand, certain species of Sorbus, when grafted on other species, yielded
twice as much fruit as when on their own roots. We are reminded by this
latter fact of the extraordinary cases of Hippeastrum, Passiflora, &c.,
which seed much more freely when fertilised with the pollen of a
distinct species than when fertilised with pollen from the same plant.

We thus see that, although there is a clear and great difference
between the mere adhesion of grafted stocks and the union of the male
and female elements in the act of reproduction, yet that there is a
rude degree of parallelism in the results of grafting and of crossing
distinct species. And as we must look at the curious and complex laws
governing the facility with which trees can be grafted on each other as
incidental on unknown differences in their vegetative systems, so I
believe that the still more complex laws governing the facility of
first crosses are incidental on unknown differences in their
reproductive systems. These differences in both cases follow, to a
certain extent, as might have been expected, systematic affinity, by
which term every kind of resemblance and dissimilarity between organic
beings is attempted to be expressed. The facts by no means seem to
indicate that the greater or lesser difficulty of either grafting or
crossing various species has been a special endowment; although in the
case of crossing, the difficulty is as important for the endurance and
stability of specific forms as in the case of grafting it is
unimportant for their welfare.

_Origin and Causes of the Sterility of first Crosses and of Hybrids._

At one time it appeared to me probable, as it has to others, that the
sterility of first crosses and of hybrids might have been slowly
acquired through the natural selection of slightly lessened degrees of
fertility, which, like any other variation, spontaneously appeared in
certain individuals of one variety when crossed with those of another
variety. For it would clearly be advantageous to two varieties or
incipient species if they could be kept from blending, on the same
principle that, when man is selecting at the same time two varieties,
it is necessary that he should keep them separate. In the first place,
it may be remarked that species inhabiting distinct regions are often
sterile when crossed; now it could clearly have been of no advantage to
such separated species to have been rendered mutually sterile, and
consequently this could not have been effected through natural
selection; but it may perhaps be argued, that, if a species was
rendered sterile with some one compatriot, sterility with other species
would follow as a necessary contingency. In the second place, it is
almost as much opposed to the theory of natural selection as to that of
special creation, that in reciprocal crosses the male element of one
form should have been rendered utterly impotent on a second form, while
at the same time the male element of this second form is enabled freely
to fertilise the first form; for this peculiar state of the
reproductive system could hardly have been advantageous to either
species.

In considering the probability of natural selection having come into
action, in rendering species mutually sterile, the greatest difficulty
will be found to lie in the existence of many graduated steps, from
slightly lessened fertility to absolute sterility. It may be admitted
that it would profit an incipient species, if it were rendered in some
slight degree sterile when crossed with its parent form or with some
other variety; for thus fewer bastardised and deteriorated offspring
would be produced to commingle their blood with the new species in
process of formation. But he who will take the trouble to reflect on
the steps by which this first degree of sterility could be increased
through natural selection to that high degree which is common with so
many species, and which is universal with species which have been
differentiated to a generic or family rank, will find the subject
extraordinarily complex. After mature reflection, it seems to me that
this could not have been effected through natural selection. Take the
case of any two species which, when crossed, produced few and sterile
offspring; now, what is there which could favour the survival of those
individuals which happened to be endowed in a slightly higher degree
with mutual infertility, and which thus approached by one small step
towards absolute sterility? Yet an advance of this kind, if the theory
of natural selection be brought to bear, must have incessantly occurred
with many species, for a multitude are mutually quite barren. With
sterile neuter insects we have reason to believe that modifications in
their structure and fertility have been slowly accumulated by natural
selection, from an advantage having been thus indirectly given to the
community to which they belonged over other communities of the same
species; but an individual animal not belonging to a social community,
if rendered slightly sterile when crossed with some other variety,
would not thus itself gain any advantage or indirectly give any
advantage to the other individuals of the same variety, thus leading to
their preservation.

But it would be superfluous to discuss this question in detail: for
with plants we have conclusive evidence that the sterility of crossed
species must be due to some principle, quite independent of natural
selection. Both Gärtner and Kölreuter have proved that in genera
including numerous species, a series can be formed from species which
when crossed yield fewer and fewer seeds, to species which never
produce a single seed, but yet are affected by the pollen of certain
other species, for the germen swells. It is here manifestly impossible
to select the more sterile individuals, which have already ceased to
yield seeds; so that this acme of sterility, when the germen alone is
effected, cannot have been gained through selection; and from the laws
governing the various grades of sterility being so uniform throughout
the animal and vegetable kingdoms, we may infer that the cause,
whatever it may be, is the same or nearly the same in all cases.

We will now look a little closer at the probable nature of the
differences between species which induce sterility in first crosses and
in hybrids. In the case of first crosses, the greater or less
difficulty in effecting a union and in obtaining offspring apparently
depends on several distinct causes. There must sometimes be a physical
impossibility in the male element reaching the ovule, as would be the
case with a plant having a pistil too long for the pollen-tubes to
reach the ovarium. It has also been observed that when the pollen of
one species is placed on the stigma of a distantly allied species,
though the pollen-tubes protrude, they do not penetrate the stigmatic
surface. Again, the male element may reach the female element, but be
incapable of causing an embryo to be developed, as seems to have been
the case with some of Thuret’s experiments on Fuci. No explanation can
be given of these facts, any more than why certain trees cannot be
grafted on others. Lastly, an embryo may be developed, and then perish
at an early period. This latter alternative has not been sufficiently
attended to; but I believe, from observations communicated to me by Mr.
Hewitt, who has had great experience in hybridising pheasants and
fowls, that the early death of the embryo is a very frequent cause of
sterility in first crosses. Mr. Salter has recently given the results
of an examination of about 500 eggs produced from various crosses
between three species of Gallus and their hybrids; the majority of
these eggs had been fertilised; and in the majority of the fertilised
eggs, the embryos had either been partially developed and had then
perished, or had become nearly mature, but the young chickens had been
unable to break through the shell. Of the chickens which were born,
more than four-fifths died within the first few days, or at latest
weeks, “without any obvious cause, apparently from mere inability to
live;” so that from the 500 eggs only twelve chickens were reared. With
plants, hybridized embryos probably often perish in a like manner; at
least it is known that hybrids raised from very distinct species are
sometimes weak and dwarfed, and perish at an early age; of which fact
Max Wichura has recently given some striking cases with hybrid willows.
It may be here worth noticing that in some cases of parthenogenesis,
the embryos within the eggs of silk moths which had not been
fertilised, pass through their early stages of development and then
perish like the embryos produced by a cross between distinct species.
Until becoming acquainted with these facts, I was unwilling to believe
in the frequent early death of hybrid embryos; for hybrids, when once
born, are generally healthy and long-lived, as we see in the case of
the common mule. Hybrids, however, are differently circumstanced before
and after birth: when born and living in a country where their two
parents live, they are generally placed under suitable conditions of
life. But a hybrid partakes of only half of the nature and constitution
of its mother; it may therefore, before birth, as long as it is
nourished within its mother’s womb, or within the egg or seed produced
by the mother, be exposed to conditions in some degree unsuitable, and
consequently be liable to perish at an early period; more especially as
all very young beings are eminently sensitive to injurious or unnatural
conditions of life. But after all, the cause more probably lies in some
imperfection in the original act of impregnation, causing the embryo to
be imperfectly developed, rather than in the conditions to which it is
subsequently exposed.

In regard to the sterility of hybrids, in which the sexual elements are
imperfectly developed, the case is somewhat different. I have more than
once alluded to a large body of facts showing that, when animals and
plants are removed from their natural conditions, they are extremely
liable to have their reproductive systems seriously affected. This, in
fact, is the great bar to the domestication of animals. Between the
sterility thus superinduced and that of hybrids, there are many points
of similarity. In both cases the sterility is independent of general
health, and is often accompanied by excess of size or great luxuriance.
In both cases the sterility occurs in various degrees; in both, the
male element is the most liable to be affected; but sometimes the
female more than the male. In both, the tendency goes to a certain
extent with systematic affinity, for whole groups of animals and plants
are rendered impotent by the same unnatural conditions; and whole
groups of species tend to produce sterile hybrids. On the other hand,
one species in a group will sometimes resist great changes of
conditions with unimpaired fertility; and certain species in a group
will produce unusually fertile hybrids. No one can tell till he tries,
whether any particular animal will breed under confinement, or any
exotic plant seed freely under culture; nor can he tell till he tries,
whether any two species of a genus will produce more or less sterile
hybrids. Lastly, when organic beings are placed during several
generations under conditions not natural to them, they are extremely
liable to vary, which seems to be partly due to their reproductive
systems having been specially affected, though in a lesser degree than
when sterility ensues. So it is with hybrids, for their offspring in
successive generations are eminently liable to vary, as every
experimentalist has observed.

Thus we see that when organic beings are placed under new and unnatural
conditions, and when hybrids are produced by the unnatural crossing of
two species, the reproductive system, independently of the general
state of health, is affected in a very similar manner. In the one case,
the conditions of life have been disturbed, though often in so slight a
degree as to be inappreciable by us; in the other case, or that of
hybrids, the external conditions have remained the same, but the
organisation has been disturbed by two distinct structures and
constitutions, including of course the reproductive systems, having
been blended into one. For it is scarcely possible that two
organisations should be compounded into one, without some disturbance
occurring in the development, or periodical action, or mutual relations
of the different parts and organs one to another or to the conditions
of life. When hybrids are able to breed _inter se_, they transmit to
their offspring from generation to generation the same compounded
organisation, and hence we need not be surprised that their sterility,
though in some degree variable, does not diminish; it is even apt to
increase, this being generally the result, as before explained, of too
close interbreeding. The above view of the sterility of hybrids being
caused by two constitutions being compounded into one has been strongly
maintained by Max Wichura.

It must, however, be owned that we cannot understand, on the above or
any other view, several facts with respect to the sterility of hybrids;
for instance, the unequal fertility of hybrids produced from reciprocal
crosses; or the increased sterility in those hybrids which occasionally
and exceptionally resemble closely either pure parent. Nor do I pretend
that the foregoing remarks go to the root of the matter: no explanation
is offered why an organism, when placed under unnatural conditions, is
rendered sterile. All that I have attempted to show is, that in two
cases, in some respects allied, sterility is the common result—in the
one case from the conditions of life having been disturbed, in the
other case from the organisation having been disturbed by two
organisations being compounded into one.

A similar parallelism holds good with an allied yet very different
class of facts. It is an old and almost universal belief, founded on a
considerable body of evidence, which I have elsewhere given, that
slight changes in the conditions of life are beneficial to all living
things. We see this acted on by farmers and gardeners in their frequent
exchanges of seed, tubers, &c., from one soil or climate to another,
and back again. During the convalescence of animals, great benefit is
derived from almost any change in their habits of life. Again, both
with plants and animals, there is the clearest evidence that a cross
between individuals of the same species, which differ to a certain
extent, gives vigour and fertility to the offspring; and that close
interbreeding continued during several generations between the nearest
relations, if these be kept under the same conditions of life, almost
always leads to decreased size, weakness, or sterility.

Hence it seems that, on the one hand, slight changes in the conditions
of life benefit all organic beings, and on the other hand, that slight
crosses, that is, crosses between the males and females of the same
species, which have been subjected to slightly different conditions, or
which have slightly varied, give vigour and fertility to the offspring.
But, as we have seen, organic beings long habituated to certain uniform
conditions under a state of nature, when subjected, as under
confinement, to a considerable change in their conditions, very
frequently are rendered more or less sterile; and we know that a cross
between two forms that have become widely or specifically different,
produce hybrids which are almost always in some degree sterile. I am
fully persuaded that this double parallelism is by no means an accident
or an illusion. He who is able to explain why the elephant, and a
multitude of other animals, are incapable of breeding when kept under
only partial confinement in their native country, will be able to
explain the primary cause of hybrids being so generally sterile. He
will at the same time be able to explain how it is that the races of
some of our domesticated animals, which have often been subjected to
new and not uniform conditions, are quite fertile together, although
they are descended from distinct species, which would probably have
been sterile if aboriginally crossed. The above two parallel series of
facts seem to be connected together by some common but unknown bond,
which is essentially related to the principle of life; this principle,
according to Mr. Herbert Spencer, being that life depends on, or
consists in, the incessant action and reaction of various forces,
which, as throughout nature, are always tending towards an equilibrium;
and when this tendency is slightly disturbed by any change, the vital
forces gain in power.

_Reciprocal Dimorphism and Trimorphism._

This subject may be here briefly discussed, and will be found to throw
some light on hybridism. Several plants belonging to distinct orders
present two forms, which exist in about equal numbers and which differ
in no respect except in their reproductive organs; one form having a
long pistil with short stamens, the other a short pistil with long
stamens; the two having differently sized pollen-grains. With
trimorphic plants there are three forms likewise differing in the
lengths of their pistils and stamens, in the size and colour of the
pollen-grains, and in some other respects; and as in each of the three
forms there are two sets of stamens, the three forms possess altogether
six sets of stamens and three kinds of pistils. These organs are so
proportioned in length to each other, that half the stamens in two of
the forms stand on a level with the stigma of the third form. Now I
have shown, and the result has been confirmed by other observers, that
in order to obtain full fertility with these plants, it is necessary
that the stigma of the one form should be fertilised by pollen taken
from the stamens of corresponding height in another form. So that with
dimorphic species two unions, which may be called legitimate, are fully
fertile; and two, which may be called illegitimate, are more or less
infertile. With trimorphic species six unions are legitimate, or fully
fertile, and twelve are illegitimate, or more or less infertile.

The infertility which may be observed in various dimorphic and
trimorphic plants, when they are illegitimately fertilised, that is by
pollen taken from stamens not corresponding in height with the pistil,
differs much in degree, up to absolute and utter sterility; just in the
same manner as occurs in crossing distinct species. As the degree of
sterility in the latter case depends in an eminent degree on the
conditions of life being more or less favourable, so I have found it
with illegitimate unions. It is well known that if pollen of a distinct
species be placed on the stigma of a flower, and its own pollen be
afterwards, even after a considerable interval of time, placed on the
same stigma, its action is so strongly prepotent that it generally
annihilates the effect of the foreign pollen; so it is with the pollen
of the several forms of the same species, for legitimate pollen is
strongly prepotent over illegitimate pollen, when both are placed on
the same stigma. I ascertained this by fertilising several flowers,
first illegitimately, and twenty-four hours afterwards legitimately,
with pollen taken from a peculiarly coloured variety, and all the
seedlings were similarly coloured; this shows that the legitimate
pollen, though applied twenty-four hours subsequently, had wholly
destroyed or prevented the action of the previously applied
illegitimate pollen. Again, as in making reciprocal crosses between the
same two species, there is occasionally a great difference in the
result, so the same thing occurs with trimorphic plants; for instance,
the mid-styled form of Lythrum salicaria was illegitimately fertilised
with the greatest ease by pollen from the longer stamens of the
short-styled form, and yielded many seeds; but the latter form did not
yield a single seed when fertilised by the longer stamens of the
mid-styled form.

In all these respects, and in others which might be added, the forms of
the same undoubted species, when illegitimately united, behave in
exactly the same manner as do two distinct species when crossed. This
led me carefully to observe during four years many seedlings, raised
from several illegitimate unions. The chief result is that these
illegitimate plants, as they may be called, are not fully fertile. It
is possible to raise from dimorphic species, both long-styled and
short-styled illegitimate plants, and from trimorphic plants all three
illegitimate forms. These can then be properly united in a legitimate
manner. When this is done, there is no apparent reason why they should
not yield as many seeds as did their parents when legitimately
fertilised. But such is not the case. They are all infertile, in
various degrees; some being so utterly and incurably sterile that they
did not yield during four seasons a single seed or even seed-capsule.
The sterility of these illegitimate plants, when united with each other
in a legitimate manner, may be strictly compared with that of hybrids
when crossed _inter se_. If, on the other hand, a hybrid is crossed
with either pure parent-species, the sterility is usually much
lessened: and so it is when an illegitimate plant is fertilised by a
legitimate plant. In the same manner as the sterility of hybrids does
not always run parallel with the difficulty of making the first cross
between the two parent-species, so that sterility of certain
illegitimate plants was unusually great, while the sterility of the
union from which they were derived was by no means great. With hybrids
raised from the same seed-capsule the degree of sterility is innately
variable, so it is in a marked manner with illegitimate plants. Lastly,
many hybrids are profuse and persistent flowerers, while other and more
sterile hybrids produce few flowers, and are weak, miserable dwarfs;
exactly similar cases occur with the illegitimate offspring of various
dimorphic and trimorphic plants.

Altogether there is the closest identity in character and behaviour
between illegitimate plants and hybrids. It is hardly an exaggeration
to maintain that illegitimate plants are hybrids, produced within the
limits of the same species by the improper union of certain forms,
while ordinary hybrids are produced from an improper union between
so-called distinct species. We have also already seen that there is the
closest similarity in all respects between first illegitimate unions
and first crosses between distinct species. This will perhaps be made
more fully apparent by an illustration; we may suppose that a botanist
found two well-marked varieties (and such occur) of the long-styled
form of the trimorphic Lythrum salicaria, and that he determined to try
by crossing whether they were specifically distinct. He would find that
they yielded only about one-fifth of the proper number of seed, and
that they behaved in all the other above specified respects as if they
had been two distinct species. But to make the case sure, he would
raise plants from his supposed hybridised seed, and he would find that
the seedlings were miserably dwarfed and utterly sterile, and that they
behaved in all other respects like ordinary hybrids. He might then
maintain that he had actually proved, in accordance with the common
view, that his two varieties were as good and as distinct species as
any in the world; but he would be completely mistaken.

The facts now given on dimorphic and trimorphic plants are important,
because they show us, first, that the physiological test of lessened
fertility, both in first crosses and in hybrids, is no safe criterion
of specific distinction; secondly, because we may conclude that there
is some unknown bond which connects the infertility of illegitimate
unions with that of their illegitimate offspring, and we are led to
extend the same view to first crosses and hybrids; thirdly, because we
find, and this seems to me of especial importance, that two or three
forms of the same species may exist and may differ in no respect
whatever, either in structure or in constitution, relatively to
external conditions, and yet be sterile when united in certain ways.
For we must remember that it is the union of the sexual elements of
individuals of the same form, for instance, of two long-styled forms,
which results in sterility; while it is the union of the sexual
elements proper to two distinct forms which is fertile. Hence the case
appears at first sight exactly the reverse of what occurs, in the
ordinary unions of the individuals of the same species and with crosses
between distinct species. It is, however, doubtful whether this is
really so; but I will not enlarge on this obscure subject.

We may, however, infer as probable from the consideration of dimorphic
and trimorphic plants, that the sterility of distinct species when
crossed and of their hybrid progeny, depends exclusively on the nature
of their sexual elements, and not on any difference in their structure
or general constitution. We are also led to this same conclusion by
considering reciprocal crosses, in which the male of one species cannot
be united, or can be united with great difficulty, with the female of a
second species, while the converse cross can be effected with perfect
facility. That excellent observer, Gärtner, likewise concluded that
species when crossed are sterile owing to differences confined to their
reproductive systems.

_Fertility of Varieties when Crossed, and of their Mongrel Offspring,
not universal._

It may be urged as an overwhelming argument that there must be some
essential distinction between species and varieties inasmuch as the
latter, however much they may differ from each other in external
appearance, cross with perfect facility, and yield perfectly fertile
offspring. With some exceptions, presently to be given, I fully admit
that this is the rule. But the subject is surrounded by difficulties,
for, looking to varieties produced under nature, if two forms hitherto
reputed to be varieties be found in any degree sterile together, they
are at once ranked by most naturalists as species. For instance, the
blue and red pimpernel, which are considered by most botanists as
varieties, are said by Gärtner to be quite sterile when crossed, and he
consequently ranks them as undoubted species. If we thus argue in a
circle, the fertility of all varieties produced under nature will
assuredly have to be granted.

If we turn to varieties, produced, or supposed to have been produced,
under domestication, we are still involved in some doubt. For when it
is stated, for instance, that certain South American indigenous
domestic dogs do not readily unite with European dogs, the explanation
which will occur to everyone, and probably the true one, is that they
are descended from aboriginally distinct species. Nevertheless the
perfect fertility of so many domestic races, differing widely from each
other in appearance, for instance, those of the pigeon, or of the
cabbage, is a remarkable fact; more especially when we reflect how many
species there are, which, though resembling each other most closely,
are utterly sterile when intercrossed. Several considerations, however,
render the fertility of domestic varieties less remarkable. In the
first place, it may be observed that the amount of external difference
between two species is no sure guide to their degree of mutual
sterility, so that similar differences in the case of varieties would
be no sure guide. It is certain that with species the cause lies
exclusively in differences in their sexual constitution. Now the
varying conditions to which domesticated animals and cultivated plants
have been subjected, have had so little tendency towards modifying the
reproductive system in a manner leading to mutual sterility, that we
have good grounds for admitting the directly opposite doctrine of
Pallas, namely, that such conditions generally eliminate this tendency;
so that the domesticated descendants of species, which in their natural
state probably would have been in some degree sterile when crossed,
become perfectly fertile together. With plants, so far is cultivation
from giving a tendency towards sterility between distinct species, that
in several well-authenticated cases already alluded to, certain plants
have been affected in an opposite manner, for they have become
self-impotent, while still retaining the capacity of fertilising, and
being fertilised by, other species. If the Pallasian doctrine of the
elimination of sterility through long-continued domestication be
admitted, and it can hardly be rejected, it becomes in the highest
degree improbable that similar conditions long-continued should
likewise induce this tendency; though in certain cases, with species
having a peculiar constitution, sterility might occasionally be thus
caused. Thus, as I believe, we can understand why, with domesticated
animals, varieties have not been produced which are mutually sterile;
and why with plants only a few such cases, immediately to be given,
have been observed.

The real difficulty in our present subject is not, as it appears to me,
why domestic varieties have not become mutually infertile when crossed,
but why this has so generally occurred with natural varieties, as soon
as they have been permanently modified in a sufficient degree to take
rank as species. We are far from precisely knowing the cause; nor is
this surprising, seeing how profoundly ignorant we are in regard to the
normal and abnormal action of the reproductive system. But we can see
that species, owing to their struggle for existence with numerous
competitors, will have been exposed during long periods of time to more
uniform conditions, than have domestic varieties; and this may well
make a wide difference in the result. For we know how commonly wild
animals and plants, when taken from their natural conditions and
subjected to captivity, are rendered sterile; and the reproductive
functions of organic beings which have always lived under natural
conditions would probably in like manner be eminently sensitive to the
influence of an unnatural cross. Domesticated productions, on the other
hand, which, as shown by the mere fact of their domestication, were not
originally highly sensitive to changes in their conditions of life, and
which can now generally resist with undiminished fertility repeated
changes of conditions, might be expected to produce varieties, which
would be little liable to have their reproductive powers injuriously
affected by the act of crossing with other varieties which had
originated in a like manner.

I have as yet spoken as if the varieties of the same species were
invariably fertile when intercrossed. But it is impossible to resist
the evidence of the existence of a certain amount of sterility in the
few following cases, which I will briefly abstract. The evidence is at
least as good as that from which we believe in the sterility of a
multitude of species. The evidence is also derived from hostile
witnesses, who in all other cases consider fertility and sterility as
safe criterions of specific distinction. Gärtner kept, during several
years, a dwarf kind of maize with yellow seeds, and a tall variety with
red seeds growing near each other in his garden; and although these
plants have separated sexes, they never naturally crossed. He then
fertilised thirteen flowers of the one kind with pollen of the other;
but only a single head produced any seed, and this one head produced
only five grains. Manipulation in this case could not have been
injurious, as the plants have separated sexes. No one, I believe, has
suspected that these varieties of maize are distinct species; and it is
important to notice that the hybrid plants thus raised were themselves
_perfectly_ fertile; so that even Gärtner did not venture to consider
the two varieties as specifically distinct.

Girou de Buzareingues crossed three varieties of gourd, which like the
maize has separated sexes, and he asserts that their mutual
fertilisation is by so much the less easy as their differences are
greater. How far these experiments may be trusted, I know not; but the
forms experimented on are ranked by Sagaret, who mainly founds his
classification by the test of infertility, as varieties, and Naudin has
come to the same conclusion.

The following case is far more remarkable, and seems at first
incredible; but it is the result of an astonishing number of
experiments made during many years on nine species of Verbascum, by so
good an observer and so hostile a witness as Gärtner: namely, that the
yellow and white varieties when crossed produce less seed than the
similarly coloured varieties of the same species. Moreover, he asserts
that, when yellow and white varieties of one species are crossed with
yellow and white varieties of a _distinct_ species, more seed is
produced by the crosses between the similarly coloured flowers, than
between those which are differently coloured. Mr. Scott also has
experimented on the species and varieties of Verbascum; and although
unable to confirm Gärtner’s results on the crossing of the distinct
species, he finds that the dissimilarly coloured varieties of the same
species yield fewer seeds, in the proportion of eighty-six to 100, than
the similarly coloured varieties. Yet these varieties differ in no
respect, except in the colour of their flowers; and one variety can
sometimes be raised from the seed of another.

Kölreuter, whose accuracy has been confirmed by every subsequent
observer, has proved the remarkable fact that one particular variety of
the common tobacco was more fertile than the other varieties, when
crossed with a widely distinct species. He experimented on five forms
which are commonly reputed to be varieties, and which he tested by the
severest trial, namely, by reciprocal crosses, and he found their
mongrel offspring perfectly fertile. But one of these five varieties,
when used either as the father or mother, and crossed with the
Nicotiana glutinosa, always yielded hybrids not so sterile as those
which were produced from the four other varieties when crossed with N.
glutinosa. Hence the reproductive system of this one variety must have
been in some manner and in some degree modified.

From these facts it can no longer be maintained that varieties when
crossed are invariably quite fertile. From the great difficulty of
ascertaining the infertility of varieties in a state of nature, for a
supposed variety, if proved to be infertile in any degree, would almost
universally be ranked as a species; from man attending only to external
characters in his domestic varieties, and from such varieties not
having been exposed for very long periods to uniform conditions of
life; from these several considerations we may conclude that fertility
does not constitute a fundamental distinction between varieties and
species when crossed. The general sterility of crossed species may
safely be looked at, not as a special acquirement or endowment, but as
incidental on changes of an unknown nature in their sexual elements.

_Hybrids and Mongrels compared, independently of their fertility._

Independently of the question of fertility, the offspring of species
and of varieties when crossed may be compared in several other
respects. Gärtner, whose strong wish it was to draw a distinct line
between species and varieties, could find very few, and, as it seems to
me, quite unimportant differences between the so-called hybrid
offspring of species, and the so-called mongrel offspring of varieties.
And, on the other hand, they agree most closely in many important
respects.

I shall here discuss this subject with extreme brevity. The most
important distinction is, that in the first generation mongrels are
more variable than hybrids; but Gärtner admits that hybrids from
species which have long been cultivated are often variable in the first
generation; and I have myself seen striking instances of this fact.
Gärtner further admits that hybrids between very closely allied species
are more variable than those from very distinct species; and this shows
that the difference in the degree of variability graduates away. When
mongrels and the more fertile hybrids are propagated for several
generations, an extreme amount of variability in the offspring in both
cases is notorious; but some few instances of both hybrids and mongrels
long retaining a uniform character could be given. The variability,
however, in the successive generations of mongrels is, perhaps, greater
than in hybrids.

This greater variability in mongrels than in hybrids does not seem at
all surprising. For the parents of mongrels are varieties, and mostly
domestic varieties (very few experiments having been tried on natural
varieties), and this implies that there has been recent variability;
which would often continue and would augment that arising from the act
of crossing. The slight variability of hybrids in the first generation,
in contrast with that in the succeeding generations, is a curious fact
and deserves attention. For it bears on the view which I have taken of
one of the causes of ordinary variability; namely, that the
reproductive system, from being eminently sensitive to changed
conditions of life, fails under these circumstances to perform its
proper function of producing offspring closely similar in all respects
to the parent-form. Now, hybrids in the first generation are descended
from species (excluding those long cultivated) which have not had their
reproductive systems in any way affected, and they are not variable;
but hybrids themselves have their reproductive systems seriously
affected, and their descendants are highly variable.

But to return to our comparison of mongrels and hybrids: Gärtner states
that mongrels are more liable than hybrids to revert to either parent
form; but this, if it be true, is certainly only a difference in
degree. Moreover, Gärtner expressly states that the hybrids from long
cultivated plants are more subject to reversion than hybrids from
species in their natural state; and this probably explains the singular
difference in the results arrived at by different observers. Thus Max
Wichura doubts whether hybrids ever revert to their parent forms, and
he experimented on uncultivated species of willows, while Naudin, on
the other hand, insists in the strongest terms on the almost universal
tendency to reversion in hybrids, and he experimented chiefly on
cultivated plants. Gärtner further states that when any two species,
although most closely allied to each other, are crossed with a third
species, the hybrids are widely different from each other; whereas if
two very distinct varieties of one species are crossed with another
species, the hybrids do not differ much. But this conclusion, as far as
I can make out, is founded on a single experiment; and seems directly
opposed to the results of several experiments made by Kölreuter.

Such alone are the unimportant differences which Gärtner is able to
point out between hybrid and mongrel plants. On the other hand, the
degrees and kinds of resemblance in mongrels and in hybrids to their
respective parents, more especially in hybrids produced from nearly
related species, follow, according to Gärtner the same laws. When two
species are crossed, one has sometimes a prepotent power of impressing
its likeness on the hybrid. So I believe it to be with varieties of
plants; and with animals, one variety certainly often has this
prepotent power over another variety. Hybrid plants produced from a
reciprocal cross generally resemble each other closely, and so it is
with mongrel plants from a reciprocal cross. Both hybrids and mongrels
can be reduced to either pure parent form, by repeated crosses in
successive generations with either parent.

These several remarks are apparently applicable to animals; but the
subject is here much complicated, partly owing to the existence of
secondary sexual characters; but more especially owing to prepotency in
transmitting likeness running more strongly in one sex than in the
other, both when one species is crossed with another and when one
variety is crossed with another variety. For instance, I think those
authors are right who maintain that the ass has a prepotent power over
the horse, so that both the mule and the hinny resemble more closely
the ass than the horse; but that the prepotency runs more strongly in
the male than in the female ass, so that the mule, which is an
offspring of the male ass and mare, is more like an ass than is the
hinny, which is the offspring of the female-ass and stallion.

Much stress has been laid by some authors on the supposed fact, that it
is only with mongrels that the offspring are not intermediate in
character, but closely resemble one of their parents; but this does
sometimes occur with hybrids, yet I grant much less frequently than
with mongrels. Looking to the cases which I have collected of
cross-bred animals closely resembling one parent, the resemblances seem
chiefly confined to characters almost monstrous in their nature, and
which have suddenly appeared—such as albinism, melanism, deficiency of
tail or horns, or additional fingers and toes; and do not relate to
characters which have been slowly acquired through selection. A
tendency to sudden reversions to the perfect character of either parent
would, also, be much more likely to occur with mongrels, which are
descended from varieties often suddenly produced and semi-monstrous in
character, than with hybrids, which are descended from species slowly
and naturally produced. On the whole, I entirely agree with Dr. Prosper
Lucas, who, after arranging an enormous body of facts with respect to
animals, comes to the conclusion that the laws of resemblance of the
child to its parents are the same, whether the two parents differ
little or much from each other, namely, in the union of individuals of
the same variety, or of different varieties, or of distinct species.

Independently of the question of fertility and sterility, in all other
respects there seems to be a general and close similarity in the
offspring of crossed species, and of crossed varieties. If we look at
species as having been specially created, and at varieties as having
been produced by secondary laws, this similarity would be an
astonishing fact. But it harmonises perfectly with the view that there
is no essential distinction between species and varieties.

_Summary of Chapter._

First crosses between forms, sufficiently distinct to be ranked as
species, and their hybrids, are very generally, but not universally,
sterile. The sterility is of all degrees, and is often so slight that
the most careful experimentalists have arrived at diametrically
opposite conclusions in ranking forms by this test. The sterility is
innately variable in individuals of the same species, and is eminently
susceptible to action of favourable and unfavourable conditions. The
degree of sterility does not strictly follow systematic affinity, but
is governed by several curious and complex laws. It is generally
different, and sometimes widely different in reciprocal crosses between
the same two species. It is not always equal in degree in a first cross
and in the hybrids produced from this cross.

In the same manner as in grafting trees, the capacity in one species or
variety to take on another, is incidental on differences, generally of
an unknown nature, in their vegetative systems, so in crossing, the
greater or less facility of one species to unite with another is
incidental on unknown differences in their reproductive systems. There
is no more reason to think that species have been specially endowed
with various degrees of sterility to prevent their crossing and
blending in nature, than to think that trees have been specially
endowed with various and somewhat analogous degrees of difficulty in
being grafted together in order to prevent their inarching in our
forests.

The sterility of first crosses and of their hybrid progeny has not been
acquired through natural selection. In the case of first crosses it
seems to depend on several circumstances; in some instances in chief
part on the early death of the embryo. In the case of hybrids, it
apparently depends on their whole organisation having been disturbed by
being compounded from two distinct forms; the sterility being closely
allied to that which so frequently affects pure species, when exposed
to new and unnatural conditions of life. He who will explain these
latter cases will be able to explain the sterility of hybrids. This
view is strongly supported by a parallelism of another kind: namely,
that, firstly, slight changes in the conditions of life add to the
vigour and fertility of all organic beings; and secondly, that the
crossing of forms, which have been exposed to slightly different
conditions of life, or which have varied, favours the size, vigour and
fertility of their offspring. The facts given on the sterility of the
illegitimate unions of dimorphic and trimorphic plants and of their
illegitimate progeny, perhaps render it probable that some unknown bond
in all cases connects the degree of fertility of first unions with that
of their offspring. The consideration of these facts on dimorphism, as
well as of the results of reciprocal crosses, clearly leads to the
conclusion that the primary cause of the sterility of crossed species
is confined to differences in their sexual elements. But why, in the
case of distinct species, the sexual elements should so generally have
become more or less modified, leading to their mutual infertility, we
do not know; but it seems to stand in some close relation to species
having been exposed for long periods of time to nearly uniform
conditions of life.

It is not surprising that the difficulty in crossing any two species,
and the sterility of their hybrid offspring, should in most cases
correspond, even if due to distinct causes: for both depend on the
amount of difference between the species which are crossed. Nor is it
surprising that the facility of effecting a first cross, and the
fertility of the hybrids thus produced, and the capacity of being
grafted together—though this latter capacity evidently depends on
widely different circumstances—should all run, to a certain extent,
parallel with the systematic affinity of the forms subjected to
experiment; for systematic affinity includes resemblances of all kinds.

First crosses between forms known to be varieties, or sufficiently
alike to be considered as varieties, and their mongrel offspring, are
very generally, but not, as is so often stated, invariably fertile. Nor
is this almost universal and perfect fertility surprising, when it is
remembered how liable we are to argue in a circle with respect to
varieties in a state of nature; and when we remember that the greater
number of varieties have been produced under domestication by the
selection of mere external differences, and that they have not been
long exposed to uniform conditions of life. It should also be
especially kept in mind, that long-continued domestication tends to
eliminate sterility, and is therefore little likely to induce this same
quality. Independently of the question of fertility, in all other
respects there is the closest general resemblance between hybrids and
mongrels, in their variability, in their power of absorbing each other
by repeated crosses, and in their inheritance of characters from both
parent-forms. Finally, then, although we are as ignorant of the precise
cause of the sterility of first crosses and of hybrids as we are why
animals and plants removed from their natural conditions become
sterile, yet the facts given in this chapter do not seem to me opposed
to the belief that species aboriginally existed as varieties.

CHAPTER X.
ON THE IMPERFECTION OF THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD.

On the absence of intermediate varieties at the present day—On the
nature of extinct intermediate varieties; on their number—On the lapse
of time, as inferred from the rate of denudation and of deposition
number—On the lapse of time as estimated by years—On the poorness of
our palæontological collections—On the intermittence of geological
formations—On the denudation of granitic areas—On the absence of
intermediate varieties in any one formation—On the sudden appearance of
groups of species—On their sudden appearance in the lowest known
fossiliferous strata—Antiquity of the habitable earth.

In the sixth chapter I enumerated the chief objections which might be
justly urged against the views maintained in this volume. Most of them
have now been discussed. One, namely, the distinctness of specific
forms and their not being blended together by innumerable transitional
links, is a very obvious difficulty. I assigned reasons why such links
do not commonly occur at the present day under the circumstances
apparently most favourable for their presence, namely, on an extensive
and continuous area with graduated physical conditions. I endeavoured
to show, that the life of each species depends in a more important
manner on the presence of other already defined organic forms, than on
climate, and, therefore, that the really governing conditions of life
do not graduate away quite insensibly like heat or moisture. I
endeavoured, also, to show that intermediate varieties, from existing
in lesser numbers than the forms which they connect, will generally be
beaten out and exterminated during the course of further modification
and improvement. The main cause, however, of innumerable intermediate
links not now occurring everywhere throughout nature depends, on the
very process of natural selection, through which new varieties
continually take the places of and supplant their parent-forms. But
just in proportion as this process of extermination has acted on an
enormous scale, so must the number of intermediate varieties, which
have formerly existed, be truly enormous. Why then is not every
geological formation and every stratum full of such intermediate links?
Geology assuredly does not reveal any such finely graduated organic
chain; and this, perhaps, is the most obvious and serious objection
which can be urged against my theory. The explanation lies, as I
believe, in the extreme imperfection of the geological record.

In the first place, it should always be borne in mind what sort of
intermediate forms must, on the theory, have formerly existed. I have
found it difficult, when looking at any two species, to avoid picturing
to myself forms _directly_ intermediate between them. But this is a
wholly false view; we should always look for forms intermediate between
each species and a common but unknown progenitor; and the progenitor
will generally have differed in some respects from all its modified
descendants. To give a simple illustration: the fantail and pouter
pigeons are both descended from the rock-pigeon; if we possessed all
the intermediate varieties which have ever existed, we should have an
extremely close series between both and the rock-pigeon; but we should
have no varieties directly intermediate between the fantail and pouter;
none, for instance, combining a tail somewhat expanded with a crop
somewhat enlarged, the characteristic features of these two breeds.
These two breeds, moreover, have become so much modified, that, if we
had no historical or indirect evidence regarding their origin, it would
not have been possible to have determined from a mere comparison of
their structure with that of the rock-pigeon, C. livia, whether they
had descended from this species or from some other allied species, such
as C. oenas.

So with natural species, if we look to forms very distinct, for
instance to the horse and tapir, we have no reason to suppose that
links directly intermediate between them ever existed, but between each
and an unknown common parent. The common parent will have had in its
whole organisation much general resemblance to the tapir and to the
horse; but in some points of structure may have differed considerably
from both, even perhaps more than they differ from each other. Hence,
in all such cases, we should be unable to recognise the parent-form of
any two or more species, even if we closely compared the structure of
the parent with that of its modified descendants, unless at the same
time we had a nearly perfect chain of the intermediate links.

It is just possible, by the theory, that one of two living forms might
have descended from the other; for instance, a horse from a tapir; and
in this case _direct_ intermediate links will have existed between
them. But such a case would imply that one form had remained for a very
long period unaltered, whilst its descendants had undergone a vast
amount of change; and the principle of competition between organism and
organism, between child and parent, will render this a very rare event;
for in all cases the new and improved forms of life tend to supplant
the old and unimproved forms.

By the theory of natural selection all living species have been
connected with the parent-species of each genus, by differences not
greater than we see between the natural and domestic varieties of the
same species at the present day; and these parent-species, now
generally extinct, have in their turn been similarly connected with
more ancient forms; and so on backwards, always converging to the
common ancestor of each great class. So that the number of intermediate
and transitional links, between all living and extinct species, must
have been inconceivably great. But assuredly, if this theory be true,
such have lived upon the earth.

_On the Lapse of Time, as inferred from the rate of deposition and
extent of Denudation._

Independently of our not finding fossil remains of such infinitely
numerous connecting links, it may be objected that time cannot have
sufficed for so great an amount of organic change, all changes having
been effected slowly. It is hardly possible for me to recall to the
reader who is not a practical geologist, the facts leading the mind
feebly to comprehend the lapse of time. He who can read Sir Charles
Lyell’s grand work on the Principles of Geology, which the future
historian will recognise as having produced a revolution in natural
science, and yet does not admit how vast have been the past periods of
time, may at once close this volume. Not that it suffices to study the
Principles of Geology, or to read special treatises by different
observers on separate formations, and to mark how each author attempts
to give an inadequate idea of the duration of each formation, or even
of each stratum. We can best gain some idea of past time by knowing the
agencies at work; and learning how deeply the surface of the land has
been denuded, and how much sediment has been deposited. As Lyell has
well remarked, the extent and thickness of our sedimentary formations
are the result and the measure of the denudation which the earth’s
crust has elsewhere undergone. Therefore a man should examine for
himself the great piles of superimposed strata, and watch the rivulets
bringing down mud, and the waves wearing away the sea-cliffs, in order
to comprehend something about the duration of past time, the monuments
of which we see all around us.

It is good to wander along the coast, when formed of moderately hard
rocks, and mark the process of degradation. The tides in most cases
reach the cliffs only for a short time twice a day, and the waves eat
into them only when they are charged with sand or pebbles; for there is
good evidence that pure water effects nothing in wearing away rock. At
last the base of the cliff is undermined, huge fragments fall down, and
these remaining fixed, have to be worn away atom by atom, until after
being reduced in size they can be rolled about by the waves, and then
they are more quickly ground into pebbles, sand, or mud. But how often
do we see along the bases of retreating cliffs rounded boulders, all
thickly clothed by marine productions, showing how little they are
abraded and how seldom they are rolled about! Moreover, if we follow
for a few miles any line of rocky cliff, which is undergoing
degradation, we find that it is only here and there, along a short
length or round a promontory, that the cliffs are at the present time
suffering. The appearance of the surface and the vegetation show that
elsewhere years have elapsed since the waters washed their base.

We have, however, recently learned from the observations of Ramsay, in
the van of many excellent observers—of Jukes, Geikie, Croll and others,
that subaërial degradation is a much more important agency than
coast-action, or the power of the waves. The whole surface of the land
is exposed to the chemical action of the air and of the rainwater, with
its dissolved carbonic acid, and in colder countries to frost; the
disintegrated matter is carried down even gentle slopes during heavy
rain, and to a greater extent than might be supposed, especially in
arid districts, by the wind; it is then transported by the streams and
rivers, which, when rapid deepen their channels, and triturate the
fragments. On a rainy day, even in a gently undulating country, we see
the effects of subaërial degradation in the muddy rills which flow down
every slope. Messrs. Ramsay and Whitaker have shown, and the
observation is a most striking one, that the great lines of escarpment
in the Wealden district and those ranging across England, which
formerly were looked at as ancient sea-coasts, cannot have been thus
formed, for each line is composed of one and the same formation, while
our sea-cliffs are everywhere formed by the intersection of various
formations. This being the case, we are compelled to admit that the
escarpments owe their origin in chief part to the rocks of which they
are composed, having resisted subaërial denudation better than the
surrounding surface; this surface consequently has been gradually
lowered, with the lines of harder rock left projecting. Nothing
impresses the mind with the vast duration of time, according to our
ideas of time, more forcibly than the conviction thus gained that
subaërial agencies, which apparently have so little power, and which
seem to work so slowly, have produced great results.

When thus impressed with the slow rate at which the land is worn away
through subaërial and littoral action, it is good, in order to
appreciate the past duration of time, to consider, on the one hand, the
masses of rock which have been removed over many extensive areas, and
on the other hand the thickness of our sedimentary formations. I
remember having been much struck when viewing volcanic islands, which
have been worn by the waves and pared all round into perpendicular
cliffs of one or two thousand feet in height; for the gentle slope of
the lava-streams, due to their formerly liquid state, showed at a
glance how far the hard, rocky beds had once extended into the open
ocean. The same story is told still more plainly by faults—those great
cracks along which the strata have been upheaved on one side, or thrown
down on the other, to the height or depth of thousands of feet; for
since the crust cracked, and it makes no great difference whether the
upheaval was sudden, or, as most geologists now believe, was slow and
effected by many starts, the surface of the land has been so completely
planed down that no trace of these vast dislocations is externally
visible. The Craven fault, for instance, extends for upward of thirty
miles, and along this line the vertical displacement of the strata
varies from 600 to 3,000 feet. Professor Ramsay has published an
account of a downthrow in Anglesea of 2,300 feet; and he informs me
that he fully believes that there is one in Merionethshire of 12,000
feet; yet in these cases there is nothing on the surface of the land to
show such prodigious movements; the pile of rocks on either side of the
crack having been smoothly swept away.

On the other hand, in all parts of the world the piles of sedimentary
strata are of wonderful thickness. In the Cordillera, I estimated one
mass of conglomerate at ten thousand feet; and although conglomerates
have probably been accumulated at a quicker rate than finer sediments,
yet from being formed of worn and rounded pebbles, each of which bears
the stamp of time, they are good to show how slowly the mass must have
been heaped together. Professor Ramsay has given me the maximum
thickness, from actual measurement in most cases, of the successive
formations in _different_ parts of Great Britain; and this is the
result:—

Feet Palæozoic strata (not including igneous beds)	57,154. Secondary
strata	13,190. Tertiary strata	2,240.

that is, very nearly thirteen and three-quarters British miles. Some of
these formations, which are represented in England by thin beds, are
thousands of feet in thickness on the Continent. Moreover, between each
successive formation we have, in the opinion of most geologists, blank
periods of enormous length. So that the lofty pile of sedimentary rocks
in Britain gives but an inadequate idea of the time which has elapsed
during their accumulation. The consideration of these various facts
impresses the mind almost in the same manner as does the vain endeavour
to grapple with the idea of eternity.

Nevertheless this impression is partly false. Mr. Croll, in an
interesting paper, remarks that we do not err “in forming too great a
conception of the length of geological periods,” but in estimating them
by years. When geologists look at large and complicated phenomena, and
then at the figures representing several million years, the two produce
a totally different effect on the mind, and the figures are at once
pronounced too small. In regard to subaërial denudation, Mr. Croll
shows, by calculating the known amount of sediment annually brought
down by certain rivers, relatively to their areas of drainage, that
1,000 feet of solid rock, as it became gradually disintegrated, would
thus be removed from the mean level of the whole area in the course of
six million years. This seems an astonishing result, and some
considerations lead to the suspicion that it may be too large, but if
halved or quartered it is still very surprising. Few of us, however,
know what a million really means: Mr. Croll gives the following
illustration: Take a narrow strip of paper, eighty-three feet four
inches in length, and stretch it along the wall of a large hall; then
mark off at one end the tenth of an inch. This tenth of an inch will
represent one hundred years, and the entire strip a million years. But
let it be borne in mind, in relation to the subject of this work, what
a hundred years implies, represented as it is by a measure utterly
insignificant in a hall of the above dimensions. Several eminent
breeders, during a single lifetime, have so largely modified some of
the higher animals, which propagate their kind much more slowly than
most of the lower animals, that they have formed what well deserves to
be called a new sub-breed. Few men have attended with due care to any
one strain for more than half a century, so that a hundred years
represents the work of two breeders in succession. It is not to be
supposed that species in a state of nature ever change so quickly as
domestic animals under the guidance of methodical selection. The
comparison would be in every way fairer with the effects which follow
from unconscious selection, that is, the preservation of the most
useful or beautiful animals, with no intention of modifying the breed;
but by this process of unconscious selection, various breeds have been
sensibly changed in the course of two or three centuries.

Species, however, probably change much more slowly, and within the same
country only a few change at the same time. This slowness follows from
all the inhabitants of the same country being already so well adapted
to each other, that new places in the polity of nature do not occur
until after long intervals, due to the occurrence of physical changes
of some kind, or through the immigration of new forms. Moreover,
variations or individual differences of the right nature, by which some
of the inhabitants might be better fitted to their new places under the
altered circumstance, would not always occur at once. Unfortunately we
have no means of determining, according to the standard of years, how
long a period it takes to modify a species; but to the subject of time
we must return.

_On the Poorness of Palæontological Collections._

Now let us turn to our richest museums, and what a paltry display we
behold! That our collections are imperfect is admitted by every one.
The remark of that admirable palæontologist, Edward Forbes, should
never be forgotten, namely, that very many fossil species are known and
named from single and often broken specimens, or from a few specimens
collected on some one spot. Only a small portion of the surface of the
earth has been geologically explored, and no part with sufficient care,
as the important discoveries made every year in Europe prove. No
organism wholly soft can be preserved. Shells and bones decay and
disappear when left on the bottom of the sea, where sediment is not
accumulating. We probably take a quite erroneous view, when we assume
that sediment is being deposited over nearly the whole bed of the sea,
at a rate sufficiently quick to embed and preserve fossil remains.
Throughout an enormously large proportion of the ocean, the bright blue
tint of the water bespeaks its purity. The many cases on record of a
formation conformably covered, after an immense interval of time, by
another and later formation, without the underlying bed having suffered
in the interval any wear and tear, seem explicable only on the view of
the bottom of the sea not rarely lying for ages in an unaltered
condition. The remains which do become embedded, if in sand or gravel,
will, when the beds are upraised, generally be dissolved by the
percolation of rain water charged with carbonic acid. Some of the many
kinds of animals which live on the beach between high and low water
mark seem to be rarely preserved. For instance, the several species of
the Chthamalinæ (a sub-family of sessile cirripedes) coat the rocks all
over the world in infinite numbers: they are all strictly littoral,
with the exception of a single Mediterranean species, which inhabits
deep water and this has been found fossil in Sicily, whereas not one
other species has hitherto been found in any tertiary formation: yet it
is known that the genus Chthamalus existed during the Chalk period.
Lastly, many great deposits, requiring a vast length of time for their
accumulation, are entirely destitute of organic remains, without our
being able to assign any reason: one of the most striking instances is
that of the Flysch formation, which consists of shale and sandstone,
several thousand, occasionally even six thousand feet in thickness, and
extending for at least 300 miles from Vienna to Switzerland; and
although this great mass has been most carefully searched, no fossils,
except a few vegetable remains, have been found.

With respect to the terrestrial productions which lived during the
Secondary and Palæozoic periods, it is superfluous to state that our
evidence is fragmentary in an extreme degree. For instance, until
recently not a land-shell was known belonging to either of these vast
periods, with the exception of one species discovered by Sir C. Lyell
and Dr. Dawson in the carboniferous strata of North America; but now
land-shells have been found in the lias. In regard to mammiferous
remains, a glance at the historical table published in Lyell’s Manual,
will bring home the truth, how accidental and rare is their
preservation, far better than pages of detail. Nor is their rarity
surprising, when we remember how large a proportion of the bones of
tertiary mammals have been discovered either in caves or in lacustrine
deposits; and that not a cave or true lacustrine bed is known belonging
to the age of our secondary or palæozoic formations.

But the imperfection in the geological record largely results from
another and more important cause than any of the foregoing; namely,
from the several formations being separated from each other by wide
intervals of time. This doctrine has been emphatically admitted by many
geologists and palæontologists, who, like E. Forbes, entirely
disbelieve in the change of species. When we see the formations
tabulated in written works, or when we follow them in nature, it is
difficult to avoid believing that they are closely consecutive. But we
know, for instance, from Sir R. Murchison’s great work on Russia, what
wide gaps there are in that country between the superimposed
formations; so it is in North America, and in many other parts of the
world. The most skilful geologist, if his attention had been confined
exclusively to these large territories, would never have suspected that
during the periods which were blank and barren in his own country,
great piles of sediment, charged with new and peculiar forms of life,
had elsewhere been accumulated. And if, in every separate territory,
hardly any idea can be formed of the length of time which has elapsed
between the consecutive formations, we may infer that this could
nowhere be ascertained. The frequent and great changes in the
mineralogical composition of consecutive formations, generally implying
great changes in the geography of the surrounding lands, whence the
sediment was derived, accord with the belief of vast intervals of time
having elapsed between each formation.

We can, I think, see why the geological formations of each region are
almost invariably intermittent; that is, have not followed each other
in close sequence. Scarcely any fact struck me more when examining many
hundred miles of the South American coasts, which have been upraised
several hundred feet within the recent period, than the absence of any
recent deposits sufficiently extensive to last for even a short
geological period. Along the whole west coast, which is inhabited by a
peculiar marine fauna, tertiary beds are so poorly developed that no
record of several successive and peculiar marine faunas will probably
be preserved to a distant age. A little reflection will explain why,
along the rising coast of the western side of South America, no
extensive formations with recent or tertiary remains can anywhere be
found, though the supply of sediment must for ages have been great,
from the enormous degradation of the coast rocks and from the muddy
streams entering the sea. The explanation, no doubt, is that the
littoral and sub-littoral deposits are continually worn away, as soon
as they are brought up by the slow and gradual rising of the land
within the grinding action of the coast-waves.

We may, I think, conclude that sediment must be accumulated in
extremely thick, solid, or extensive masses, in order to withstand the
incessant action of the waves, when first upraised and during
subsequent oscillations of level, as well as the subsequent subaërial
degradation. Such thick and extensive accumulations of sediment may be
formed in two ways; either in profound depths of the sea, in which case
the bottom will not be inhabited by so many and such varied forms of
life as the more shallow seas; and the mass when upraised will give an
imperfect record of the organisms which existed in the neighbourhood
during the period of its accumulation. Or sediment may be deposited to
any thickness and extent over a shallow bottom, if it continue slowly
to subside. In this latter case, as long as the rate of subsidence and
supply of sediment nearly balance each other, the sea will remain
shallow and favourable for many and varied forms, and thus a rich
fossiliferous formation, thick enough, when upraised, to resist a large
amount of denudation, may be formed.

I am convinced that nearly all our ancient formations, which are
throughout the greater part of their thickness _rich in fossils_, have
thus been formed during subsidence. Since publishing my views on this
subject in 1845, I have watched the progress of geology, and have been
surprised to note how author after author, in treating of this or that
great formation, has come to the conclusion that it was accumulated
during subsidence. I may add, that the only ancient tertiary formation
on the west coast of South America, which has been bulky enough to
resist such degradation as it has as yet suffered, but which will
hardly last to a distant geological age, was deposited during a
downward oscillation of level, and thus gained considerable thickness.

All geological facts tell us plainly that each area has undergone
numerous slow oscillations of level, and apparently these oscillations
have affected wide spaces. Consequently, formations rich in fossils and
sufficiently thick and extensive to resist subsequent degradation, will
have been formed over wide spaces during periods of subsidence, but
only where the supply of sediment was sufficient to keep the sea
shallow and to embed and preserve the remains before they had time to
decay. On the other hand, as long as the bed of the sea remained
stationary, _thick_ deposits cannot have been accumulated in the
shallow parts, which are the most favourable to life. Still less can
this have happened during the alternate periods of elevation; or, to
speak more accurately, the beds which were then accumulated will
generally have been destroyed by being upraised and brought within the
limits of the coast-action.

These remarks apply chiefly to littoral and sublittoral deposits. In
the case of an extensive and shallow sea, such as that within a large
part of the Malay Archipelago, where the depth varies from thirty or
forty to sixty fathoms, a widely extended formation might be formed
during a period of elevation, and yet not suffer excessively from
denudation during its slow upheaval; but the thickness of the formation
could not be great, for owing to the elevatory movement it would be
less than the depth in which it was formed; nor would the deposit be
much consolidated, nor be capped by overlying formations, so that it
would run a good chance of being worn away by atmospheric degradation
and by the action of the sea during subsequent oscillations of level.
It has, however, been suggested by Mr. Hopkins, that if one part of the
area, after rising and before being denuded, subsided, the deposit
formed during the rising movement, though not thick, might afterwards
become protected by fresh accumulations, and thus be preserved for a
long period.

Mr. Hopkins also expresses his belief that sedimentary beds of
considerable horizontal extent have rarely been completely destroyed.
But all geologists, excepting the few who believe that our present
metamorphic schists and plutonic rocks once formed the primordial
nucleus of the globe, will admit that these latter rocks have been
stripped of their covering to an enormous extent. For it is scarcely
possible that such rocks could have been solidified and crystallised
while uncovered; but if the metamorphic action occurred at profound
depths of the ocean, the former protecting mantle of rock may not have
been very thick. Admitting then that gneiss, mica-schist, granite,
diorite, &c., were once necessarily covered up, how can we account for
the naked and extensive areas of such rocks in many parts of the world,
except on the belief that they have subsequently been completely
denuded of all overlying strata? That such extensive areas do exist
cannot be doubted: the granitic region of Parime is described by
Humboldt as being at least nineteen times as large as Switzerland.
South of the Amazon, Boue colours an area composed of rocks of this
nature as equal to that of Spain, France, Italy, part of Germany, and
the British Islands, all conjoined. This region has not been carefully
explored, but from the concurrent testimony of travellers, the granitic
area is very large: thus Von Eschwege gives a detailed section of these
rocks, stretching from Rio de Janeiro for 260 geographical miles inland
in a straight line; and I travelled for 150 miles in another direction,
and saw nothing but granitic rocks. Numerous specimens, collected along
the whole coast, from near Rio de Janeiro to the mouth of the Plata, a
distance of 1,100 geographical miles, were examined by me, and they all
belonged to this class. Inland, along the whole northern bank of the
Plata, I saw, besides modern tertiary beds, only one small patch of
slightly metamorphosed rock, which alone could have formed a part of
the original capping of the granitic series. Turning to a well-known
region, namely, to the United States and Canada, as shown in Professor
H.D. Rogers’ beautiful map, I have estimated the areas by cutting out
and weighing the paper, and I find that the metamorphic (excluding the
“semi-metamorphic”) and granite rocks exceed, in the proportion of 19
to 12.5, the whole of the newer Palæozoic formations. In many regions
the metamorphic and granite rocks would be found much more widely
extended than they appear to be, if all the sedimentary beds were
removed which rest unconformably on them, and which could not have
formed part of the original mantle under which they were crystallised.
Hence, it is probable that in some parts of the world whole formations
have been completely denuded, with not a wreck left behind.

One remark is here worth a passing notice. During periods of elevation
the area of the land and of the adjoining shoal parts of the sea will
be increased and new stations will often be formed—all circumstances
favourable, as previously explained, for the formation of new varieties
and species; but during such periods there will generally be a blank in
the geological record. On the other hand, during subsidence, the
inhabited area and number of inhabitants will decrease (excepting on
the shores of a continent when first broken up into an archipelago),
and consequently during subsidence, though there will be much
extinction, few new varieties or species will be formed; and it is
during these very periods of subsidence that the deposits which are
richest in fossils have been accumulated.

_On the Absence of Numerous Intermediate Varieties in any Single
Formation._

From these several considerations it cannot be doubted that the
geological record, viewed as a whole, is extremely imperfect; but if we
confine our attention to any one formation, it becomes much more
difficult to understand why we do not therein find closely graduated
varieties between the allied species which lived at its commencement
and at its close. Several cases are on record of the same species
presenting varieties in the upper and lower parts of the same
formation. Thus Trautschold gives a number of instances with Ammonites,
and Hilgendorf has described a most curious case of ten graduated forms
of Planorbis multiformis in the successive beds of a fresh-water
formation in Switzerland. Although each formation has indisputably
required a vast number of years for its deposition, several reasons can
be given why each should not commonly include a graduated series of
links between the species which lived at its commencement and close,
but I cannot assign due proportional weight to the following
considerations.

Although each formation may mark a very long lapse of years, each
probably is short compared with the period requisite to change one
species into another. I am aware that two palæontologists, whose
opinions are worthy of much deference, namely Bronn and Woodward, have
concluded that the average duration of each formation is twice or
thrice as long as the average duration of specific forms. But
insuperable difficulties, as it seems to me, prevent us from coming to
any just conclusion on this head. When we see a species first appearing
in the middle of any formation, it would be rash in the extreme to
infer that it had not elsewhere previously existed. So again, when we
find a species disappearing before the last layers have been deposited,
it would be equally rash to suppose that it then became extinct. We
forget how small the area of Europe is compared with the rest of the
world; nor have the several stages of the same formation throughout
Europe been correlated with perfect accuracy.

We may safely infer that with marine animals of all kinds there has
been a large amount of migration due to climatal and other changes; and
when we see a species first appearing in any formation, the probability
is that it only then first immigrated into that area. It is well known,
for instance, that several species appear somewhat earlier in the
palæozoic beds of North America than in those of Europe; time having
apparently been required for their migration from the American to the
European seas. In examining the latest deposits, in various quarters of
the world, it has everywhere been noted, that some few still existing
species are common in the deposit, but have become extinct in the
immediately surrounding sea; or, conversely, that some are now abundant
in the neighbouring sea, but are rare or absent in this particular
deposit. It is an excellent lesson to reflect on the ascertained amount
of migration of the inhabitants of Europe during the glacial epoch,
which forms only a part of one whole geological period; and likewise to
reflect on the changes of level, on the extreme change of climate, and
on the great lapse of time, all included within this same glacial
period. Yet it may be doubted whether, in any quarter of the world,
sedimentary deposits, _including fossil remains_, have gone on
accumulating within the same area during the whole of this period. It
is not, for instance, probable that sediment was deposited during the
whole of the glacial period near the mouth of the Mississippi, within
that limit of depth at which marine animals can best flourish: for we
know that great geographical changes occurred in other parts of America
during this space of time. When such beds as were deposited in shallow
water near the mouth of the Mississippi during some part of the glacial
period shall have been upraised, organic remains will probably first
appear and disappear at different levels, owing to the migrations of
species and to geographical changes. And in the distant future, a
geologist, examining these beds, would be tempted to conclude that the
average duration of life of the embedded fossils had been less than
that of the glacial period, instead of having been really far greater,
that is, extending from before the glacial epoch to the present day.

In order to get a perfect gradation between two forms in the upper and
lower parts of the same formation, the deposit must have gone on
continuously accumulating during a long period, sufficient for the slow
process of modification; hence, the deposit must be a very thick one;
and the species undergoing change must have lived in the same district
throughout the whole time. But we have seen that a thick formation,
fossiliferous throughout its entire thickness, can accumulate only
during a period of subsidence; and to keep the depth approximately the
same, which is necessary that the same marine species may live on the
same space, the supply of sediment must nearly counterbalance the
amount of subsidence. But this same movement of subsidence will tend to
submerge the area whence the sediment is derived, and thus diminish the
supply, whilst the downward movement continues. In fact, this nearly
exact balancing between the supply of sediment and the amount of
subsidence is probably a rare contingency; for it has been observed by
more than one palæontologist that very thick deposits are usually
barren of organic remains, except near their upper or lower limits.

It would seem that each separate formation, like the whole pile of
formations in any country, has generally been intermittent in its
accumulation. When we see, as is so often the case, a formation
composed of beds of widely different mineralogical composition, we may
reasonably suspect that the process of deposition has been more or less
interrupted. Nor will the closest inspection of a formation give us any
idea of the length of time which its deposition may have consumed. Many
instances could be given of beds, only a few feet in thickness,
representing formations which are elsewhere thousands of feet in
thickness, and which must have required an enormous period for their
accumulation; yet no one ignorant of this fact would have even
suspected the vast lapse of time represented by the thinner formation.
Many cases could be given of the lower beds of a formation having been
upraised, denuded, submerged, and then re-covered by the upper beds of
the same formation—facts, showing what wide, yet easily overlooked,
intervals have occurred in its accumulation. In other cases we have the
plainest evidence in great fossilised trees, still standing upright as
they grew, of many long intervals of time and changes of level during
the process of deposition, which would not have been suspected, had not
the trees been preserved: thus Sir C. Lyell and Dr. Dawson found
carboniferous beds 1,400 feet thick in Nova Scotia, with ancient
root-bearing strata, one above the other, at no less than sixty-eight
different levels. Hence, when the same species occurs at the bottom,
middle, and top of a formation, the probability is that it has not
lived on the same spot during the whole period of deposition, but has
disappeared and reappeared, perhaps many times, during the same
geological period. Consequently if it were to undergo a considerable
amount of modification during the deposition of any one geological
formation, a section would not include all the fine intermediate
gradations which must on our theory have existed, but abrupt, though
perhaps slight, changes of form.

It is all-important to remember that naturalists have no golden rule by
which to distinguish species and varieties; they grant some little
variability to each species, but when they meet with a somewhat greater
amount of difference between any two forms, they rank both as species,
unless they are enabled to connect them together by the closest
intermediate gradations; and this, from the reasons just assigned, we
can seldom hope to effect in any one geological section. Supposing B
and C to be two species, and a third, A, to be found in an older and
underlying bed; even if A were strictly intermediate between B and C,
it would simply be ranked as a third and distinct species, unless at
the same time it could be closely connected by intermediate varieties
with either one or both forms. Nor should it be forgotten, as before
explained, that A might be the actual progenitor of B and C, and yet
would not necessarily be strictly intermediate between them in all
respects. So that we might obtain the parent-species and its several
modified descendants from the lower and upper beds of the same
formation, and unless we obtained numerous transitional gradations, we
should not recognise their blood-relationship, and should consequently
rank them as distinct species.

It is notorious on what excessively slight differences many
palæontologists have founded their species; and they do this the more
readily if the specimens come from different sub-stages of the same
formation. Some experienced conchologists are now sinking many of the
very fine species of D’Orbigny and others into the rank of varieties;
and on this view we do find the kind of evidence of change which on the
theory we ought to find. Look again at the later tertiary deposits,
which include many shells believed by the majority of naturalists to be
identical with existing species; but some excellent naturalists, as
Agassiz and Pictet, maintain that all these tertiary species are
specifically distinct, though the distinction is admitted to be very
slight; so that here, unless we believe that these eminent naturalists
have been misled by their imaginations, and that these late tertiary
species really present no difference whatever from their living
representatives, or unless we admit, in opposition to the judgment of
most naturalists, that these tertiary species are all truly distinct
from the recent, we have evidence of the frequent occurrence of slight
modifications of the kind required. If we look to rather wider
intervals of time, namely, to distinct but consecutive stages of the
same great formation, we find that the embedded fossils, though
universally ranked as specifically different, yet are far more closely
related to each other than are the species found in more widely
separated formations; so that here again we have undoubted evidence of
change in the direction required by the theory; but to this latter
subject I shall return in the following chapter.

With animals and plants that propagate rapidly and do not wander much,
there is reason to suspect, as we have formerly seen, that their
varieties are generally at first local; and that such local varieties
do not spread widely and supplant their parent-form until they have
been modified and perfected in some considerable degree. According to
this view, the chance of discovering in a formation in any one country
all the early stages of transition between any two forms, is small, for
the successive changes are supposed to have been local or confined to
some one spot. Most marine animals have a wide range; and we have seen
that with plants it is those which have the widest range, that oftenest
present varieties, so that, with shells and other marine animals, it is
probable that those which had the widest range, far exceeding the
limits of the known geological formations in Europe, have oftenest
given rise, first to local varieties and ultimately to new species; and
this again would greatly lessen the chance of our being able to trace
the stages of transition in any one geological formation.

It is a more important consideration, leading to the same result, as
lately insisted on by Dr. Falconer, namely, that the period during
which each species underwent modification, though long as measured by
years, was probably short in comparison with that during which it
remained without undergoing any change.

It should not be forgotten, that at the present day, with perfect
specimens for examination, two forms can seldom be connected by
intermediate varieties, and thus proved to be the same species, until
many specimens are collected from many places; and with fossil species
this can rarely be done. We shall, perhaps, best perceive the
improbability of our being enabled to connect species by numerous,
fine, intermediate, fossil links, by asking ourselves whether, for
instance, geologists at some future period will be able to prove that
our different breeds of cattle, sheep, horses, and dogs are descended
from a single stock or from several aboriginal stocks; or, again,
whether certain sea-shells inhabiting the shores of North America,
which are ranked by some conchologists as distinct species from their
European representatives, and by other conchologists as only varieties,
are really varieties, or are, as it is called, specifically distinct.
This could be effected by the future geologist only by his discovering
in a fossil state numerous intermediate gradations; and such success is
improbable in the highest degree.

It has been asserted over and over again, by writers who believe in the
immutability of species, that geology yields no linking forms. This
assertion, as we shall see in the next chapter, is certainly erroneous.
As Sir J. Lubbock has remarked, “Every species is a link between other
allied forms.” If we take a genus having a score of species, recent and
extinct, and destroy four-fifths of them, no one doubts that the
remainder will stand much more distinct from each other. If the extreme
forms in the genus happen to have been thus destroyed, the genus itself
will stand more distinct from other allied genera. What geological
research has not revealed, is the former existence of infinitely
numerous gradations, as fine as existing varieties, connecting together
nearly all existing and extinct species. But this ought not to be
expected; yet this has been repeatedly advanced as a most serious
objection against my views.

It may be worth while to sum up the foregoing remarks on the causes of
the imperfection of the geological record under an imaginary
illustration. The Malay Archipelago is about the size of Europe from
the North Cape to the Mediterranean, and from Britain to Russia; and
therefore equals all the geological formations which have been examined
with any accuracy, excepting those of the United States of America. I
fully agree with Mr. Godwin-Austen, that the present condition of the
Malay Archipelago, with its numerous large islands separated by wide
and shallow seas, probably represents the former state of Europe, while
most of our formations were accumulating. The Malay Archipelago is one
of the richest regions in organic beings; yet if all the species were
to be collected which have ever lived there, how imperfectly would they
represent the natural history of the world!

But we have every reason to believe that the terrestrial productions of
the archipelago would be preserved in an extremely imperfect manner in
the formations which we suppose to be there accumulating. Not many of
the strictly littoral animals, or of those which lived on naked
submarine rocks, would be embedded; and those embedded in gravel or
sand would not endure to a distant epoch. Wherever sediment did not
accumulate on the bed of the sea, or where it did not accumulate at a
sufficient rate to protect organic bodies from decay, no remains could
be preserved.

Formations rich in fossils of many kinds, and of thickness sufficient
to last to an age as distant in futurity as the secondary formations
lie in the past, would generally be formed in the archipelago only
during periods of subsidence. These periods of subsidence would be
separated from each other by immense intervals of time, during which
the area would be either stationary or rising; whilst rising, the
fossiliferous formations on the steeper shores would be destroyed,
almost as soon as accumulated, by the incessant coast-action, as we now
see on the shores of South America. Even throughout the extensive and
shallow seas within the archipelago, sedimentary beds could hardly be
accumulated of great thickness during the periods of elevation, or
become capped and protected by subsequent deposits, so as to have a
good chance of enduring to a very distant future. During the periods of
subsidence, there would probably be much extinction of life; during the
periods of elevation, there would be much variation, but the geological
record would then be less perfect.

It may be doubted whether the duration of any one great period of
subsidence over the whole or part of the archipelago, together with a
contemporaneous accumulation of sediment, would _exceed_ the average
duration of the same specific forms; and these contingencies are
indispensable for the preservation of all the transitional gradations
between any two or more species. If such gradations were not all fully
preserved, transitional varieties would merely appear as so many new,
though closely allied species. It is also probable that each great
period of subsidence would be interrupted by oscillations of level, and
that slight climatical changes would intervene during such lengthy
periods; and in these cases the inhabitants of the archipelago would
migrate, and no closely consecutive record of their modifications could
be preserved in any one formation.

Very many of the marine inhabitants of the archipelago now range
thousands of miles beyond its confines; and analogy plainly leads to
the belief that it would be chiefly these far-ranging species, though
only some of them, which would oftenest produce new varieties; and the
varieties would at first be local or confined to one place, but if
possessed of any decided advantage, or when further modified and
improved, they would slowly spread and supplant their parent-forms.
When such varieties returned to their ancient homes, as they would
differ from their former state in a nearly uniform, though perhaps
extremely slight degree, and as they would be found embedded in
slightly different sub-stages of the same formation, they would,
according to the principles followed by many palæontologists, be ranked
as new and distinct species.

If then there be some degree of truth in these remarks, we have no
right to expect to find, in our geological formations, an infinite
number of those fine transitional forms, which, on our theory, have
connected all the past and present species of the same group into one
long and branching chain of life. We ought only to look for a few
links, and such assuredly we do find—some more distantly, some more
closely, related to each other; and these links, let them be ever so
close, if found in different stages of the same formation, would, by
many palæontologists, be ranked as distinct species. But I do not
pretend that I should ever have suspected how poor was the record in
the best preserved geological sections, had not the absence of
innumerable transitional links between the species which lived at the
commencement and close of each formation, pressed so hardly on my
theory.

_On the sudden Appearance of whole Groups of allied Species._

The abrupt manner in which whole groups of species suddenly appear in
certain formations, has been urged by several palæontologists—for
instance, by Agassiz, Pictet, and Sedgwick, as a fatal objection to the
belief in the transmutation of species. If numerous species, belonging
to the same genera or families, have really started into life at once,
the fact would be fatal to the theory of evolution through natural
selection. For the development by this means of a group of forms, all
of which are descended from some one progenitor, must have been an
extremely slow process; and the progenitors must have lived long before
their modified descendants. But we continually overrate the perfection
of the geological record, and falsely infer, because certain genera or
families have not been found beneath a certain stage, that they did not
exist before that stage. In all cases positive palæontological evidence
may be implicitly trusted; negative evidence is worthless, as
experience has so often shown. We continually forget how large the
world is, compared with the area over which our geological formations
have been carefully examined; we forget that groups of species may
elsewhere have long existed, and have slowly multiplied, before they
invaded the ancient archipelagoes of Europe and the United States. We
do not make due allowance for the enormous intervals of time which have
elapsed between our consecutive formations, longer perhaps in many
cases than the time required for the accumulation of each formation.
These intervals will have given time for the multiplication of species
from some one parent-form: and in the succeeding formation, such groups
or species will appear as if suddenly created.

I may here recall a remark formerly made, namely, that it might require
a long succession of ages to adapt an organism to some new and peculiar
line of life, for instance, to fly through the air; and consequently
that the transitional forms would often long remain confined to some
one region; but that, when this adaptation had once been effected, and
a few species had thus acquired a great advantage over other organisms,
a comparatively short time would be necessary to produce many divergent
forms, which would spread rapidly and widely throughout the world.
Professor Pictet, in his excellent Review of this work, in commenting
on early transitional forms, and taking birds as an illustration,
cannot see how the successive modifications of the anterior limbs of a
supposed prototype could possibly have been of any advantage. But look
at the penguins of the Southern Ocean; have not these birds their front
limbs in this precise intermediate state of “neither true arms nor true
wings?” Yet these birds hold their place victoriously in the battle for
life; for they exist in infinite numbers and of many kinds. I do not
suppose that we here see the real transitional grades through which the
wings of birds have passed; but what special difficulty is there in
believing that it might profit the modified descendants of the penguin,
first to become enabled to flap along the surface of the sea like the
logger-headed duck, and ultimately to rise from its surface and glide
through the air?

I will now give a few examples to illustrate the foregoing remarks, and
to show how liable we are to error in supposing that whole groups of
species have suddenly been produced. Even in so short an interval as
that between the first and second editions of Pictet’s great work on
Palæontology, published in 1844-46 and in 1853-57, the conclusions on
the first appearance and disappearance of several groups of animals
have been considerably modified; and a third edition would require
still further changes. I may recall the well-known fact that in
geological treatises, published not many years ago, mammals were always
spoken of as having abruptly come in at the commencement of the
tertiary series. And now one of the richest known accumulations of
fossil mammals belongs to the middle of the secondary series; and true
mammals have been discovered in the new red sandstone at nearly the
commencement of this great series. Cuvier used to urge that no monkey
occurred in any tertiary stratum; but now extinct species have been
discovered in India, South America and in Europe, as far back as the
miocene stage. Had it not been for the rare accident of the
preservation of footsteps in the new red sandstone of the United
States, who would have ventured to suppose that no less than at least
thirty different bird-like animals, some of gigantic size, existed
during that period? Not a fragment of bone has been discovered in these
beds. Not long ago, palæontologists maintained that the whole class of
birds came suddenly into existence during the eocene period; but now we
know, on the authority of Professor Owen, that a bird certainly lived
during the deposition of the upper greensand; and still more recently,
that strange bird, the Archeopteryx, with a long lizard-like tail,
bearing a pair of feathers on each joint, and with its wings furnished
with two free claws, has been discovered in the oolitic slates of
Solenhofen. Hardly any recent discovery shows more forcibly than this
how little we as yet know of the former inhabitants of the world.

I may give another instance, which, from having passed under my own
eyes has much struck me. In a memoir on Fossil Sessile Cirripedes, I
stated that, from the large number of existing and extinct tertiary
species; from the extraordinary abundance of the individuals of many
species all over the world, from the Arctic regions to the equator,
inhabiting various zones of depths, from the upper tidal limits to
fifty fathoms; from the perfect manner in which specimens are preserved
in the oldest tertiary beds; from the ease with which even a fragment
of a valve can be recognised; from all these circumstances, I inferred
that, had sessile cirripedes existed during the secondary periods, they
would certainly have been preserved and discovered; and as not one
species had then been discovered in beds of this age, I concluded that
this great group had been suddenly developed at the commencement of the
tertiary series. This was a sore trouble to me, adding, as I then
thought, one more instance of the abrupt appearance of a great group of
species. But my work had hardly been published, when a skilful
palæontologist, M. Bosquet, sent me a drawing of a perfect specimen of
an unmistakable sessile cirripede, which he had himself extracted from
the chalk of Belgium. And, as if to make the case as striking as
possible, this cirripede was a Chthamalus, a very common, large, and
ubiquitous genus, of which not one species has as yet been found even
in any tertiary stratum. Still more recently, a Pyrgoma, a member of a
distinct subfamily of sessile cirripedes, has been discovered by Mr.
Woodward in the upper chalk; so that we now have abundant evidence of
the existence of this group of animals during the secondary period.

The case most frequently insisted on by palæontologists of the
apparently sudden appearance of a whole group of species, is that of
the teleostean fishes, low down, according to Agassiz, in the Chalk
period. This group includes the large majority of existing species. But
certain Jurassic and Triassic forms are now commonly admitted to be
teleostean; and even some palæozoic forms have thus been classed by one
high authority. If the teleosteans had really appeared suddenly in the
northern hemisphere at the commencement of the chalk formation, the
fact would have been highly remarkable; but it would not have formed an
insuperable difficulty, unless it could likewise have been shown that
at the same period the species were suddenly and simultaneously
developed in other quarters of the world. It is almost superfluous to
remark that hardly any fossil-fish are known from south of the equator;
and by running through Pictet’s Palæontology it will be seen that very
few species are known from several formations in Europe. Some few
families of fish now have a confined range; the teleostean fishes might
formerly have had a similarly confined range, and after having been
largely developed in some one sea, have spread widely. Nor have we any
right to suppose that the seas of the world have always been so freely
open from south to north as they are at present. Even at this day, if
the Malay Archipelago were converted into land, the tropical parts of
the Indian Ocean would form a large and perfectly enclosed basin, in
which any great group of marine animals might be multiplied; and here
they would remain confined, until some of the species became adapted to
a cooler climate, and were enabled to double the southern capes of
Africa or Australia, and thus reach other and distant seas.

From these considerations, from our ignorance of the geology of other
countries beyond the confines of Europe and the United States, and from
the revolution in our palæontological knowledge effected by the
discoveries of the last dozen years, it seems to me to be about as rash
to dogmatize on the succession of organic forms throughout the world,
as it would be for a naturalist to land for five minutes on a barren
point in Australia, and then to discuss the number and range of its
productions.

_On the sudden Appearance of Groups of allied Species in the lowest
known Fossiliferous Strata._

There is another and allied difficulty, which is much more serious. I
allude to the manner in which species belonging to several of the main
divisions of the animal kingdom suddenly appear in the lowest known
fossiliferous rocks. Most of the arguments which have convinced me that
all the existing species of the same group are descended from a single
progenitor, apply with equal force to the earliest known species. For
instance, it cannot be doubted that all the Cambrian and Silurian
trilobites are descended from some one crustacean, which must have
lived long before the Cambrian age, and which probably differed greatly
from any known animal. Some of the most ancient animals, as the
Nautilus, Lingula, &c., do not differ much from living species; and it
cannot on our theory be supposed, that these old species were the
progenitors of all the species belonging to the same groups which have
subsequently appeared, for they are not in any degree intermediate in
character.

Consequently, if the theory be true, it is indisputable that before the
lowest Cambrian stratum was deposited long periods elapsed, as long as,
or probably far longer than, the whole interval from the Cambrian age
to the present day; and that during these vast periods the world
swarmed with living creatures. Here we encounter a formidable
objection; for it seems doubtful whether the earth, in a fit state for
the habitation of living creatures, has lasted long enough. Sir W.
Thompson concludes that the consolidation of the crust can hardly have
occurred less than twenty or more than four hundred million years ago,
but probably not less than ninety-eight or more than two hundred
million years. These very wide limits show how doubtful the data are;
and other elements may have hereafter to be introduced into the
problem. Mr. Croll estimates that about sixty million years have
elapsed since the Cambrian period, but this, judging from the small
amount of organic change since the commencement of the Glacial epoch,
appears a very short time for the many and great mutations of life,
which have certainly occurred since the Cambrian formation; and the
previous one hundred and forty million years can hardly be considered
as sufficient for the development of the varied forms of life which
already existed during the Cambrian period. It is, however, probable,
as Sir William Thompson insists, that the world at a very early period
was subjected to more rapid and violent changes in its physical
conditions than those now occurring; and such changes would have tended
to induce changes at a corresponding rate in the organisms which then
existed.

To the question why we do not find rich fossiliferous deposits
belonging to these assumed earliest periods prior to the Cambrian
system, I can give no satisfactory answer. Several eminent geologists,
with Sir R. Murchison at their head, were until recently convinced that
we beheld in the organic remains of the lowest Silurian stratum the
first dawn of life. Other highly competent judges, as Lyell and E.
Forbes, have disputed this conclusion. We should not forget that only a
small portion of the world is known with accuracy. Not very long ago M.
Barrande added another and lower stage, abounding with new and peculiar
species, beneath the then known Silurian system; and now, still lower
down in the Lower Cambrian formation, Mr Hicks has found South Wales
beds rich in trilobites, and containing various molluscs and annelids.
The presence of phosphatic nodules and bituminous matter, even in some
of the lowest azotic rocks, probably indicates life at these periods;
and the existence of the Eozoon in the Laurentian formation of Canada
is generally admitted. There are three great series of strata beneath
the Silurian system in Canada, in the lowest of which the Eozoon is
found. Sir W. Logan states that their “united thickness may possibly
far surpass that of all the succeeding rocks, from the base of the
palæozoic series to the present time. We are thus carried back to a
period so remote, that the appearance of the so-called primordial fauna
(of Barrande) may by some be considered as a comparatively modern
event.” The Eozoon belongs to the most lowly organised of all classes
of animals, but is highly organised for its class; it existed in
countless numbers, and, as Dr. Dawson has remarked, certainly preyed on
other minute organic beings, which must have lived in great numbers.
Thus the words, which I wrote in 1859, about the existence of living
beings long before the Cambrian period, and which are almost the same
with those since used by Sir W. Logan, have proved true. Nevertheless,
the difficulty of assigning any good reason for the absence of vast
piles of strata rich in fossils beneath the Cambrian system is very
great. It does not seem probable that the most ancient beds have been
quite worn away by denudation, or that their fossils have been wholly
obliterated by metamorphic action, for if this had been the case we
should have found only small remnants of the formations next succeeding
them in age, and these would always have existed in a partially
metamorphosed condition. But the descriptions which we possess of the
Silurian deposits over immense territories in Russia and in North
America, do not support the view that the older a formation is the more
invariably it has suffered extreme denudation and metamorphism.

The case at present must remain inexplicable; and may be truly urged as
a valid argument against the views here entertained. To show that it
may hereafter receive some explanation, I will give the following
hypothesis. From the nature of the organic remains which do not appear
to have inhabited profound depths, in the several formations of Europe
and of the United States; and from the amount of sediment, miles in
thickness, of which the formations are composed, we may infer that from
first to last large islands or tracts of land, whence the sediment was
derived, occurred in the neighbourhood of the now existing continents
of Europe and North America. This same view has since been maintained
by Agassiz and others. But we do not know what was the state of things
in the intervals between the several successive formations; whether
Europe and the United States during these intervals existed as dry
land, or as a submarine surface near land, on which sediment was not
deposited, or as the bed of an open and unfathomable sea.

Looking to the existing oceans, which are thrice as extensive as the
land, we see them studded with many islands; but hardly one truly
oceanic island (with the exception of New Zealand, if this can be
called a truly oceanic island) is as yet known to afford even a remnant
of any palæozoic or secondary formation. Hence, we may perhaps infer,
that during the palæozoic and secondary periods, neither continents nor
continental islands existed where our oceans now extend; for had they
existed, palæozoic and secondary formations would in all probability
have been accumulated from sediment derived from their wear and tear;
and would have been at least partially upheaved by the oscillations of
level, which must have intervened during these enormously long periods.
If, then, we may infer anything from these facts, we may infer that,
where our oceans now extend, oceans have extended from the remotest
period of which we have any record; and on the other hand, that where
continents now exist, large tracts of land have existed, subjected, no
doubt, to great oscillations of level, since the Cambrian period. The
coloured map appended to my volume on Coral Reefs, led me to conclude
that the great oceans are still mainly areas of subsidence, the great
archipelagoes still areas of oscillations of level, and the continents
areas of elevation. But we have no reason to assume that things have
thus remained from the beginning of the world. Our continents seem to
have been formed by a preponderance, during many oscillations of level,
of the force of elevation. But may not the areas of preponderant
movement have changed in the lapse of ages? At a period long antecedent
to the Cambrian epoch, continents may have existed where oceans are now
spread out, and clear and open oceans may have existed where our
continents now stand. Nor should we be justified in assuming that if,
for instance, the bed of the Pacific Ocean were now converted into a
continent we should there find sedimentary formations, in recognisable
condition, older than the Cambrian strata, supposing such to have been
formerly deposited; for it might well happen that strata which had
subsided some miles nearer to the centre of the earth, and which had
been pressed on by an enormous weight of superincumbent water, might
have undergone far more metamorphic action than strata which have
always remained nearer to the surface. The immense areas in some parts
of the world, for instance in South America, of naked metamorphic
rocks, which must have been heated under great pressure, have always
seemed to me to require some special explanation; and we may perhaps
believe that we see in these large areas the many formations long
anterior to the Cambrian epoch in a completely metamorphosed and
denuded condition.

The several difficulties here discussed, namely, that, though we find
in our geological formations many links between the species which now
exist and which formerly existed, we do not find infinitely numerous
fine transitional forms closely joining them all together. The sudden
manner in which several groups of species first appear in our European
formations, the almost entire absence, as at present known, of
formations rich in fossils beneath the Cambrian strata, are all
undoubtedly of the most serious nature. We see this in the fact that
the most eminent palæontologists, namely, Cuvier, Agassiz, Barrande,
Pictet, Falconer, E. Forbes, &c., and all our greatest geologists, as
Lyell, Murchison, Sedgwick, &c., have unanimously, often vehemently,
maintained the immutability of species. But Sir Charles Lyell now gives
the support of his high authority to the opposite side, and most
geologists and palæontologists are much shaken in their former belief.
Those who believe that the geological record is in any degree perfect,
will undoubtedly at once reject my theory. For my part, following out
Lyell’s metaphor, I look at the geological record as a history of the
world imperfectly kept and written in a changing dialect. Of this
history we possess the last volume alone, relating only to two or three
countries. Of this volume, only here and there a short chapter has been
preserved, and of each page, only here and there a few lines. Each word
of the slowly-changing language, more or less different in the
successive chapters, may represent the forms of life, which are
entombed in our consecutive formations, and which falsely appear to
have been abruptly introduced. On this view the difficulties above
discussed are greatly diminished or even disappear.

CHAPTER XI.
ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS.

On the slow and successive appearance of new species—On their different
rates of change—Species once lost do not reappear—Groups of species
follow the same general rules in their appearance and disappearance as
do single species—On extinction—On simultaneous changes in the forms of
life throughout the world—On the affinities of extinct species to each
other and to living species—On the state of development of ancient
forms—On the succession of the same types within the same areas—Summary
of preceding and present chapters.

Let us now see whether the several facts and laws relating to the
geological succession of organic beings accord best with the common
view of the immutability of species, or with that of their slow and
gradual modification, through variation and natural selection.

New species have appeared very slowly, one after another, both on the
land and in the waters. Lyell has shown that it is hardly possible to
resist the evidence on this head in the case of the several tertiary
stages; and every year tends to fill up the blanks between the stages,
and to make the proportion between the lost and existing forms more
gradual. In some of the most recent beds, though undoubtedly of high
antiquity if measured by years, only one or two species are extinct,
and only one or two are new, having appeared there for the first time,
either locally, or, as far as we know, on the face of the earth. The
secondary formations are more broken; but, as Bronn has remarked,
neither the appearance nor disappearance of the many species embedded
in each formation has been simultaneous.

Species belonging to different genera and classes have not changed at
the same rate, or in the same degree. In the older tertiary beds a few
living shells may still be found in the midst of a multitude of extinct
forms. Falconer has given a striking instance of a similar fact, for an
existing crocodile is associated with many lost mammals and reptiles in
the sub-Himalayan deposits. The Silurian Lingula differs but little
from the living species of this genus; whereas most of the other
Silurian Molluscs and all the Crustaceans have changed greatly. The
productions of the land seem to have changed at a quicker rate than
those of the sea, of which a striking instance has been observed in
Switzerland. There is some reason to believe that organisms high in the
scale, change more quickly than those that are low: though there are
exceptions to this rule. The amount of organic change, as Pictet has
remarked, is not the same in each successive so-called formation. Yet
if we compare any but the most closely related formations, all the
species will be found to have undergone some change. When a species has
once disappeared from the face of the earth, we have no reason to
believe that the same identical form ever reappears. The strongest
apparent exception to this latter rule is that of the so-called
“colonies” of M. Barrande, which intrude for a period in the midst of
an older formation, and then allow the pre-existing fauna to reappear;
but Lyell’s explanation, namely, that it is a case of temporary
migration from a distinct geographical province, seems satisfactory.

These several facts accord well with our theory, which includes no
fixed law of development, causing all the inhabitants of an area to
change abruptly, or simultaneously, or to an equal degree. The process
of modification must be slow, and will generally affect only a few
species at the same time; for the variability of each species is
independent of that of all others. Whether such variations or
individual differences as may arise will be accumulated through natural
selection in a greater or less degree, thus causing a greater or less
amount of permanent modification, will depend on many complex
contingencies—on the variations being of a beneficial nature, on the
freedom of intercrossing, on the slowly changing physical conditions of
the country, on the immigration of new colonists, and on the nature of
the other inhabitants with which the varying species come into
competition. Hence it is by no means surprising that one species should
retain the same identical form much longer than others; or, if
changing, should change in a less degree. We find similar relations
between the existing inhabitants of distinct countries; for instance,
the land-shells and coleopterous insects of Madeira have come to differ
considerably from their nearest allies on the continent of Europe,
whereas the marine shells and birds have remained unaltered. We can
perhaps understand the apparently quicker rate of change in terrestrial
and in more highly organised productions compared with marine and lower
productions, by the more complex relations of the higher beings to
their organic and inorganic conditions of life, as explained in a
former chapter. When many of the inhabitants of any area have become
modified and improved, we can understand, on the principle of
competition, and from the all-important relations of organism to
organism in the struggle for life, that any form which did not become
in some degree modified and improved, would be liable to extermination.
Hence, we see why all the species in the same region do at last, if we
look to long enough intervals of time, become modified; for otherwise
they would become extinct.

In members of the same class the average amount of change, during long
and equal periods of time, may, perhaps, be nearly the same; but as the
accumulation of enduring formations, rich in fossils, depends on great
masses of sediment being deposited on subsiding areas, our formations
have been almost necessarily accumulated at wide and irregularly
intermittent intervals of time; consequently the amount of organic
change exhibited by the fossils embedded in consecutive formations is
not equal. Each formation, on this view, does not mark a new and
complete act of creation, but only an occasional scene, taken almost at
hazard, in an ever slowly changing drama.

We can clearly understand why a species when once lost should never
reappear, even if the very same conditions of life, organic and
inorganic, should recur. For though the offspring of one species might
be adapted (and no doubt this has occurred in innumerable instances) to
fill the place of another species in the economy of nature, and thus
supplant it; yet the two forms—the old and the new—would not be
identically the same; for both would almost certainly inherit different
characters from their distinct progenitors; and organisms already
differing would vary in a different manner. For instance, it is
possible, if all our fantail-pigeons were destroyed, that fanciers
might make a new breed hardly distinguishable from the present breed;
but if the parent rock-pigeon were likewise destroyed, and under nature
we have every reason to believe that parent forms are generally
supplanted and exterminated by their improved offspring, it is
incredible that a fantail, identical with the existing breed, could be
raised from any other species of pigeon, or even from any other well
established race of the domestic pigeon, for the successive variations
would almost certainly be in some degree different, and the
newly-formed variety would probably inherit from its progenitor some
characteristic differences.

Groups of species, that is, genera and families, follow the same
general rules in their appearance and disappearance as do single
species, changing more or less quickly, and in a greater or lesser
degree. A group, when it has once disappeared, never reappears; that
is, its existence, as long as it lasts, is continuous. I am aware that
there are some apparent exceptions to this rule, but the exceptions are
surprisingly few, so few that E. Forbes, Pictet, and Woodward (though
all strongly opposed to such views as I maintain) admit its truth; and
the rule strictly accords with the theory. For all the species of the
same group, however long it may have lasted, are the modified
descendants one from the other, and all from a common progenitor. In
the genus Lingula, for instance, the species which have successively
appeared at all ages must have been connected by an unbroken series of
generations, from the lowest Silurian stratum to the present day.

We have seen in the last chapter that whole groups of species sometimes
falsely appear to have been abruptly developed; and I have attempted to
give an explanation of this fact, which if true would be fatal to my
views. But such cases are certainly exceptional; the general rule being
a gradual increase in number, until the group reaches its maximum, and
then, sooner or later, a gradual decrease. If the number of the species
included within a genus, or the number of the genera within a family,
be represented by a vertical line of varying thickness, ascending
through the successive geological formations, in which the species are
found, the line will sometimes falsely appear to begin at its lower
end, not in a sharp point, but abruptly; it then gradually thickens
upwards, often keeping of equal thickness for a space, and ultimately
thins out in the upper beds, marking the decrease and final extinction
of the species. This gradual increase in number of the species of a
group is strictly conformable with the theory; for the species of the
same genus, and the genera of the same family, can increase only slowly
and progressively; the process of modification and the production of a
number of allied forms necessarily being a slow and gradual process,
one species first giving rise to two or three varieties, these being
slowly converted into species, which in their turn produce by equally
slow steps other varieties and species, and so on, like the branching
of a great tree from a single stem, till the group becomes large.

_On Extinction._

We have as yet only spoken incidentally of the disappearance of species
and of groups of species. On the theory of natural selection, the
extinction of old forms and the production of new and improved forms
are intimately connected together. The old notion of all the
inhabitants of the earth having been swept away by catastrophes at
successive periods is very generally given up, even by those
geologists, as Elie de Beaumont, Murchison, Barrande, &c., whose
general views would naturally lead them to this conclusion. On the
contrary, we have every reason to believe, from the study of the
tertiary formations, that species and groups of species gradually
disappear, one after another, first from one spot, then from another,
and finally from the world. In some few cases, however, as by the
breaking of an isthmus and the consequent irruption of a multitude of
new inhabitants into an adjoining sea, or by the final subsidence of an
island, the process of extinction may have been rapid. Both single
species and whole groups of species last for very unequal periods; some
groups, as we have seen, have endured from the earliest known dawn of
life to the present day; some have disappeared before the close of the
palæozoic period. No fixed law seems to determine the length of time
during which any single species or any single genus endures. There is
reason to believe that the extinction of a whole group of species is
generally a slower process than their production: if their appearance
and disappearance be represented, as before, by a vertical line of
varying thickness the line is found to taper more gradually at its
upper end, which marks the progress of extermination, than at its lower
end, which marks the first appearance and the early increase in number
of the species. In some cases, however, the extermination of whole
groups, as of ammonites, towards the close of the secondary period, has
been wonderfully sudden.

The extinction of species has been involved in the most gratuitous
mystery. Some authors have even supposed that, as the individual has a
definite length of life, so have species a definite duration. No one
can have marvelled more than I have done at the extinction of species.
When I found in La Plata the tooth of a horse embedded with the remains
of Mastodon, Megatherium, Toxodon and other extinct monsters, which all
co-existed with still living shells at a very late geological period, I
was filled with astonishment; for, seeing that the horse, since its
introduction by the Spaniards into South America, has run wild over the
whole country and has increased in numbers at an unparalleled rate, I
asked myself what could so recently have exterminated the former horse
under conditions of life apparently so favourable. But my astonishment
was groundless. Professor Owen soon perceived that the tooth, though so
like that of the existing horse, belonged to an extinct species. Had
this horse been still living, but in some degree rare, no naturalist
would have felt the least surprise at its rarity; for rarity is the
attribute of a vast number of species of all classes, in all countries.
If we ask ourselves why this or that species is rare, we answer that
something is unfavourable in its conditions of life; but what that
something is, we can hardly ever tell. On the supposition of the fossil
horse still existing as a rare species, we might have felt certain,
from the analogy of all other mammals, even of the slow-breeding
elephant, and from the history of the naturalisation of the domestic
horse in South America, that under more favourable conditions it would
in a very few years have stocked the whole continent. But we could not
have told what the unfavourable conditions were which checked its
increase, whether some one or several contingencies, and at what period
of the horse’s life, and in what degree they severally acted. If the
conditions had gone on, however slowly, becoming less and less
favourable, we assuredly should not have perceived the fact, yet the
fossil horse would certainly have become rarer and rarer, and finally
extinct—its place being seized on by some more successful competitor.

It is most difficult always to remember that the increase of every
living creature is constantly being checked by unperceived hostile
agencies; and that these same unperceived agencies are amply sufficient
to cause rarity, and finally extinction. So little is this subject
understood, that I have heard surprise repeatedly expressed at such
great monsters as the Mastodon and the more ancient Dinosaurians having
become extinct; as if mere bodily strength gave victory in the battle
of life. Mere size, on the contrary, would in some cases determine, as
has been remarked by Owen, quicker extermination, from the greater
amount of requisite food. Before man inhabited India or Africa, some
cause must have checked the continued increase of the existing
elephant. A highly capable judge, Dr. Falconer, believes that it is
chiefly insects which, from incessantly harassing and weakening the
elephant in India, check its increase; and this was Bruce’s conclusion
with respect to the African elephant in Abyssinia. It is certain that
insects and blood-sucking bats determine the existence of the larger
naturalised quadrupeds in several parts of South America.

We see in many cases in the more recent tertiary formations that rarity
precedes extinction; and we know that this has been the progress of
events with those animals which have been exterminated, either locally
or wholly, through man’s agency. I may repeat what I published in 1845,
namely, that to admit that species generally become rare before they
become extinct—to feel no surprise at the rarity of a species, and yet
to marvel greatly when the species ceases to exist, is much the same as
to admit that sickness in the individual is the forerunner of death—to
feel no surprise at sickness, but, when the sick man dies, to wonder
and to suspect that he died by some deed of violence.

The theory of natural selection is grounded on the belief that each new
variety and ultimately each new species, is produced and maintained by
having some advantage over those with which it comes into competition;
and the consequent extinction of less-favoured forms almost inevitably
follows. It is the same with our domestic productions: when a new and
slightly improved variety has been raised, it at first supplants the
less improved varieties in the same neighbourhood; when much improved
it is transported far and near, like our short-horn cattle, and takes
the place of other breeds in other countries. Thus the appearance of
new forms and the disappearance of old forms, both those naturally and
artificially produced, are bound together. In flourishing groups, the
number of new specific forms which have been produced within a given
time has at some periods probably been greater than the number of the
old specific forms which have been exterminated; but we know that
species have not gone on indefinitely increasing, at least during the
later geological epochs, so that, looking to later times, we may
believe that the production of new forms has caused the extinction of
about the same number of old forms.

The competition will generally be most severe, as formerly explained
and illustrated by examples, between the forms which are most like each
other in all respects. Hence the improved and modified descendants of a
species will generally cause the extermination of the parent-species;
and if many new forms have been developed from any one species, the
nearest allies of that species, _i.e._ the species of the same genus,
will be the most liable to extermination. Thus, as I believe, a number
of new species descended from one species, that is a new genus, comes
to supplant an old genus, belonging to the same family. But it must
often have happened that a new species belonging to some one group has
seized on the place occupied by a species belonging to a distinct
group, and thus have caused its extermination. If many allied forms be
developed from the successful intruder, many will have to yield their
places; and it will generally be the allied forms, which will suffer
from some inherited inferiority in common. But whether it be species
belonging to the same or to a distinct class, which have yielded their
places to other modified and improved species, a few of the sufferers
may often be preserved for a long time, from being fitted to some
peculiar line of life, or from inhabiting some distant and isolated
station, where they will have escaped severe competition. For instance,
some species of Trigonia, a great genus of shells in the secondary
formations, survive in the Australian seas; and a few members of the
great and almost extinct group of Ganoid fishes still inhabit our fresh
waters. Therefore, the utter extinction of a group is generally, as we
have seen, a slower process than its production.

With respect to the apparently sudden extermination of whole families
or orders, as of Trilobites at the close of the palæozoic period, and
of Ammonites at the close of the secondary period, we must remember
what has been already said on the probable wide intervals of time
between our consecutive formations; and in these intervals there may
have been much slow extermination. Moreover, when, by sudden
immigration or by unusually rapid development, many species of a new
group have taken possession of an area, many of the older species will
have been exterminated in a correspondingly rapid manner; and the forms
which thus yield their places will commonly be allied, for they will
partake of the same inferiority in common.

Thus, as it seems to me, the manner in which single species and whole
groups of species become extinct accords well with the theory of
natural selection. We need not marvel at extinction; if we must marvel,
let it be at our presumption in imagining for a moment that we
understand the many complex contingencies on which the existence of
each species depends. If we forget for an instant that each species
tends to increase inordinately, and that some check is always in
action, yet seldom perceived by us, the whole economy of nature will be
utterly obscured. Whenever we can precisely say why this species is
more abundant in individuals than that; why this species and not
another can be naturalised in a given country; then, and not until
then, we may justly feel surprise why we cannot account for the
extinction of any particular species or group of species.

_On the Forms of Life changing almost simultaneously throughout the
World._

Scarcely any palæontological discovery is more striking than the fact
that the forms of life change almost simultaneously throughout the
world. Thus our European Chalk formation can be recognised in many
distant regions, under the most different climates, where not a
fragment of the mineral chalk itself can be found; namely, in North
America, in equatorial South America, in Tierra del Fuego, at the Cape
of Good Hope, and in the peninsula of India. For at these distant
points, the organic remains in certain beds present an unmistakable
resemblance to those of the Chalk. It is not that the same species are
met with; for in some cases not one species is identically the same,
but they belong to the same families, genera, and sections of genera,
and sometimes are similarly characterised in such trifling points as
mere superficial sculpture. Moreover, other forms, which are not found
in the Chalk of Europe, but which occur in the formations either above
or below, occur in the same order at these distant points of the world.
In the several successive palæozoic formations of Russia, Western
Europe and North America, a similar parallelism in the forms of life
has been observed by several authors; so it is, according to Lyell,
with the European and North American tertiary deposits. Even if the few
fossil species which are common to the Old and New Worlds were kept
wholly out of view, the general parallelism in the successive forms of
life, in the palæozoic and tertiary stages, would still be manifest,
and the several formations could be easily correlated.

These observations, however, relate to the marine inhabitants of the
world: we have not sufficient data to judge whether the productions of
the land and of fresh water at distant points change in the same
parallel manner. We may doubt whether they have thus changed: if the
Megatherium, Mylodon, Macrauchenia, and Toxodon had been brought to
Europe from La Plata, without any information in regard to their
geological position, no one would have suspected that they had
co-existed with sea-shells all still living; but as these anomalous
monsters co-existed with the Mastodon and Horse, it might at least have
been inferred that they had lived during one of the later tertiary
stages.

When the marine forms of life are spoken of as having changed
simultaneously throughout the world, it must not be supposed that this
expression relates to the same year, or even to the same century, or
even that it has a very strict geological sense; for if all the marine
animals now living in Europe, and all those that lived in Europe during
the pleistocene period (a very remote period as measured by years,
including the whole glacial epoch) were compared with those now
existing in South America or in Australia, the most skilful naturalist
would hardly be able to say whether the present or the pleistocene
inhabitants of Europe resembled most closely those of the southern
hemisphere. So, again, several highly competent observers maintain that
the existing productions of the United States are more closely related
to those which lived in Europe during certain late tertiary stages,
than to the present inhabitants of Europe; and if this be so, it is
evident that fossiliferous beds now deposited on the shores of North
America would hereafter be liable to be classed with somewhat older
European beds. Nevertheless, looking to a remotely future epoch, there
can be little doubt that all the more modern _marine_ formations,
namely, the upper pliocene, the pleistocene and strictly modern beds of
Europe, North and South America, and Australia, from containing fossil
remains in some degree allied, and from not including those forms which
are found only in the older underlying deposits, would be correctly
ranked as simultaneous in a geological sense.

The fact of the forms of life changing simultaneously in the above
large sense, at distant parts of the world, has greatly struck those
admirable observers, MM. de Verneuil and d’Archiac. After referring to
the parallelism of the palæozoic forms of life in various parts of
Europe, they add, “If struck by this strange sequence, we turn our
attention to North America, and there discover a series of analogous
phenomena, it will appear certain that all these modifications of
species, their extinction, and the introduction of new ones, cannot be
owing to mere changes in marine currents or other causes more or less
local and temporary, but depend on general laws which govern the whole
animal kingdom.” M. Barrande has made forcible remarks to precisely the
same effect. It is, indeed, quite futile to look to changes of
currents, climate, or other physical conditions, as the cause of these
great mutations in the forms of life throughout the world, under the
most different climates. We must, as Barrande has remarked, look to
some special law. We shall see this more clearly when we treat of the
present distribution of organic beings, and find how slight is the
relation between the physical conditions of various countries and the
nature of their inhabitants.

This great fact of the parallel succession of the forms of life
throughout the world, is explicable on the theory of natural selection.
New species are formed by having some advantage over older forms; and
the forms, which are already dominant, or have some advantage over the
other forms in their own country, give birth to the greatest number of
new varieties or incipient species. We have distinct evidence on this
head, in the plants which are dominant, that is, which are commonest
and most widely diffused, producing the greatest number of new
varieties. It is also natural that the dominant, varying and
far-spreading species, which have already invaded, to a certain extent,
the territories of other species, should be those which would have the
best chance of spreading still further, and of giving rise in new
countries to other new varieties and species. The process of diffusion
would often be very slow, depending on climatal and geographical
changes, on strange accidents, and on the gradual acclimatization of
new species to the various climates through which they might have to
pass, but in the course of time the dominant forms would generally
succeed in spreading and would ultimately prevail. The diffusion would,
it is probable, be slower with the terrestrial inhabitants of distinct
continents than with the marine inhabitants of the continuous sea. We
might therefore expect to find, as we do find, a less strict degree of
parallelism in the succession of the productions of the land than with
those of the sea.

Thus, as it seems to me, the parallel, and, taken in a large sense,
simultaneous, succession of the same forms of life throughout the
world, accords well with the principle of new species having been
formed by dominant species spreading widely and varying; the new
species thus produced being themselves dominant, owing to their having
had some advantage over their already dominant parents, as well as over
other species; and again spreading, varying, and producing new forms.
The old forms which are beaten and which yield their places to the new
and victorious forms, will generally be allied in groups, from
inheriting some inferiority in common; and, therefore, as new and
improved groups spread throughout the world, old groups disappear from
the world; and the succession of forms everywhere tends to correspond
both in their first appearance and final disappearance.

There is one other remark connected with this subject worth making. I
have given my reasons for believing that most of our great formations,
rich in fossils, were deposited during periods of subsidence; and that
blank intervals of vast duration, as far as fossils are concerned,
occurred during the periods when the bed of the sea was either
stationary or rising, and likewise when sediment was not thrown down
quickly enough to embed and preserve organic remains. During these long
and blank intervals I suppose that the inhabitants of each region
underwent a considerable amount of modification and extinction, and
that there was much migration from other parts of the world. As we have
reason to believe that large areas are affected by the same movement,
it is probable that strictly contemporaneous formations have often been
accumulated over very wide spaces in the same quarter of the world; but
we are very far from having any right to conclude that this has
invariably been the case, and that large areas have invariably been
affected by the same movements. When two formations have been deposited
in two regions during nearly, but not exactly, the same period, we
should find in both, from the causes explained in the foregoing
paragraphs, the same general succession in the forms of life; but the
species would not exactly correspond; for there will have been a little
more time in the one region than in the other for modification,
extinction, and immigration.

I suspect that cases of this nature occur in Europe. Mr. Prestwich, in
his admirable Memoirs on the eocene deposits of England and France, is
able to draw a close general parallelism between the successive stages
in the two countries; but when he compares certain stages in England
with those in France, although he finds in both a curious accordance in
the numbers of the species belonging to the same genera, yet the
species themselves differ in a manner very difficult to account for
considering the proximity of the two areas, unless, indeed, it be
assumed that an isthmus separated two seas inhabited by distinct, but
contemporaneous faunas. Lyell has made similar observations on some of
the later tertiary formations. Barrande, also, shows that there is a
striking general parallelism in the successive Silurian deposits of
Bohemia and Scandinavia; nevertheless he finds a surprising amount of
difference in the species. If the several formations in these regions
have not been deposited during the same exact periods—a formation in
one region often corresponding with a blank interval in the other—and
if in both regions the species have gone on slowly changing during the
accumulation of the several formations and during the long intervals of
time between them; in this case the several formations in the two
regions could be arranged in the same order, in accordance with the
general succession of the forms of life, and the order would falsely
appear to be strictly parallel; nevertheless the species would not all
be the same in the apparently corresponding stages in the two regions.

_On the Affinities of Extinct Species to each other, and to Living
Forms._

Let us now look to the mutual affinities of extinct and living species.
All fall into a few grand classes; and this fact is at once explained
on the principle of descent. The more ancient any form is, the more, as
a general rule, it differs from living forms. But, as Buckland long ago
remarked, extinct species can all be classed either in still existing
groups, or between them. That the extinct forms of life help to fill up
the intervals between existing genera, families, and orders, is
certainly true; but as this statement has often been ignored or even
denied, it may be well to make some remarks on this subject, and to
give some instances. If we confine our attention either to the living
or to the extinct species of the same class, the series is far less
perfect than if we combine both into one general system. In the
writings of Professor Owen we continually meet with the expression of
generalised forms, as applied to extinct animals; and in the writings
of Agassiz, of prophetic or synthetic types; and these terms imply that
such forms are, in fact, intermediate or connecting links. Another
distinguished palæontologist, M. Gaudry, has shown in the most striking
manner that many of the fossil mammals discovered by him in Attica
serve to break down the intervals between existing genera. Cuvier
ranked the Ruminants and Pachyderms as two of the most distinct orders
of mammals; but so many fossil links have been disentombed that Owen
has had to alter the whole classification, and has placed certain
Pachyderms in the same sub-order with ruminants; for example, he
dissolves by gradations the apparently wide interval between the pig
and the camel. The Ungulata or hoofed quadrupeds are now divided into
the even-toed or odd-toed divisions; but the Macrauchenia of South
America connects to a certain extent these two grand divisions. No one
will deny that the Hipparion is intermediate between the existing horse
and certain other ungulate forms. What a wonderful connecting link in
the chain of mammals is the Typotherium from South America, as the name
given to it by Professor Gervais expresses, and which cannot be placed
in any existing order. The Sirenia form a very distinct group of the
mammals, and one of the most remarkable peculiarities in existing
dugong and lamentin is the entire absence of hind limbs, without even a
rudiment being left; but the extinct Halitherium had, according to
Professor Flower, an ossified thigh-bone “articulated to a well-defined
acetabulum in the pelvis,” and it thus makes some approach to ordinary
hoofed quadrupeds, to which the Sirenia are in other respects allied.
The cetaceans or whales are widely different from all other mammals,
but the tertiary Zeuglodon and Squalodon, which have been placed by
some naturalists in an order by themselves, are considered by Professor
Huxley to be undoubtedly cetaceans, “and to constitute connecting links
with the aquatic carnivora.”

Even the wide interval between birds and reptiles has been shown by the
naturalist just quoted to be partially bridged over in the most
unexpected manner, on the one hand, by the ostrich and extinct
Archeopteryx, and on the other hand by the Compsognathus, one of the
Dinosaurians—that group which includes the most gigantic of all
terrestrial reptiles. Turning to the Invertebrata, Barrande asserts, a
higher authority could not be named, that he is every day taught that,
although palæozoic animals can certainly be classed under existing
groups, yet that at this ancient period the groups were not so
distinctly separated from each other as they now are.

Some writers have objected to any extinct species, or group of species,
being considered as intermediate between any two living species, or
groups of species. If by this term it is meant that an extinct form is
directly intermediate in all its characters between two living forms or
groups, the objection is probably valid. But in a natural
classification many fossil species certainly stand between living
species, and some extinct genera between living genera, even between
genera belonging to distinct families. The most common case, especially
with respect to very distinct groups, such as fish and reptiles, seems
to be that, supposing them to be distinguished at the present day by a
score of characters, the ancient members are separated by a somewhat
lesser number of characters, so that the two groups formerly made a
somewhat nearer approach to each other than they now do.

It is a common belief that the more ancient a form is, by so much the
more it tends to connect by some of its characters groups now widely
separated from each other. This remark no doubt must be restricted to
those groups which have undergone much change in the course of
geological ages; and it would be difficult to prove the truth of the
proposition, for every now and then even a living animal, as the
Lepidosiren, is discovered having affinities directed towards very
distinct groups. Yet if we compare the older Reptiles and Batrachians,
the older Fish, the older Cephalopods, and the eocene Mammals, with the
recent members of the same classes, we must admit that there is truth
in the remark.

Let us see how far these several facts and inferences accord with the
theory of descent with modification. As the subject is somewhat
complex, I must request the reader to turn to the diagram in the fourth
chapter. We may suppose that the numbered letters in italics represent
genera, and the dotted lines diverging from them the species in each
genus. The diagram is much too simple, too few genera and too few
species being given, but this is unimportant for us. The horizontal
lines may represent successive geological formations, and all the forms
beneath the uppermost line may be considered as extinct. The three
existing genera, _a_14, _q_14, _p_14, will form a small family; _b_14
and _f_14, a closely allied family or subfamily; and _o_14, _e_14,
_m_14, a third family. These three families, together with the many
extinct genera on the several lines of descent diverging from the
parent form (A) will form an order; for all will have inherited
something in common from their ancient progenitor. On the principle of
the continued tendency to divergence of character, which was formerly
illustrated by this diagram, the more recent any form is the more it
will generally differ from its ancient progenitor. Hence, we can
understand the rule that the most ancient fossils differ most from
existing forms. We must not, however, assume that divergence of
character is a necessary contingency; it depends solely on the
descendants from a species being thus enabled to seize on many and
different places in the economy of nature. Therefore it is quite
possible, as we have seen in the case of some Silurian forms, that a
species might go on being slightly modified in relation to its slightly
altered conditions of life, and yet retain throughout a vast period the
same general characteristics. This is represented in the diagram by the
letter F14.

All the many forms, extinct and recent, descended from (A), make, as
before remarked, one order; and this order, from the continued effects
of extinction and divergence of character, has become divided into
several sub-families and families, some of which are supposed to have
perished at different periods, and some to have endured to the present
day.

By looking at the diagram we can see that if many of the extinct forms
supposed to be embedded in the successive formations, were discovered
at several points low down in the series, the three existing families
on the uppermost line would be rendered less distinct from each other.
If, for instance, the genera _a_1, _a_5, _a_10, _f_8, _m_3, _m_6, _m_9,
were disinterred, these three families would be so closely linked
together that they probably would have to be united into one great
family, in nearly the same manner as has occurred with ruminants and
certain pachyderms. Yet he who objected to consider as intermediate the
extinct genera, which thus link together the living genera of three
families, would be partly justified, for they are intermediate, not
directly, but only by a long and circuitous course through many widely
different forms. If many extinct forms were to be discovered above one
of the middle horizontal lines or geological formations—for instance,
above No. VI.—but none from beneath this line, then only two of the
families (those on the left hand _a_14, &c., and _b_14, &c.) would have
to be united into one; and there would remain two families which would
be less distinct from each other than they were before the discovery of
the fossils. So again, if the three families formed of eight genera
(_a_14 to _m_14), on the uppermost line, be supposed to differ from
each other by half-a-dozen important characters, then the families
which existed at a period marked VI would certainly have differed from
each other by a less number of characters; for they would at this early
stage of descent have diverged in a less degree from their common
progenitor. Thus it comes that ancient and extinct genera are often in
a greater or less degree intermediate in character between their
modified descendants, or between their collateral relations.

Under nature the process will be far more complicated than is
represented in the diagram; for the groups will have been more
numerous; they will have endured for extremely unequal lengths of time,
and will have been modified in various degrees. As we possess only the
last volume of the geological record, and that in a very broken
condition, we have no right to expect, except in rare cases, to fill up
the wide intervals in the natural system, and thus to unite distinct
families or orders. All that we have a right to expect is, that those
groups which have, within known geological periods, undergone much
modification, should in the older formations make some slight approach
to each other; so that the older members should differ less from each
other in some of their characters than do the existing members of the
same groups; and this by the concurrent evidence of our best
palæontologists is frequently the case.

Thus, on the theory of descent with modification, the main facts with
respect to the mutual affinities of the extinct forms of life to each
other and to living forms, are explained in a satisfactory manner. And
they are wholly inexplicable on any other view.

On this same theory, it is evident that the fauna during any one great
period in the earth’s history will be intermediate in general character
between that which preceded and that which succeeded it. Thus the
species which lived at the sixth great stage of descent in the diagram
are the modified offspring of those which lived at the fifth stage, and
are the parents of those which became still more modified at the
seventh stage; hence they could hardly fail to be nearly intermediate
in character between the forms of life above and below. We must,
however, allow for the entire extinction of some preceding forms, and
in any one region for the immigration of new forms from other regions,
and for a large amount of modification during the long and blank
intervals between the successive formations. Subject to these
allowances, the fauna of each geological period undoubtedly is
intermediate in character, between the preceding and succeeding faunas.
I need give only one instance, namely, the manner in which the fossils
of the Devonian system, when this system was first discovered, were at
once recognised by palæontologists as intermediate in character between
those of the overlying carboniferous and underlying Silurian systems.
But each fauna is not necessarily exactly intermediate, as unequal
intervals of time have elapsed between consecutive formations.

It is no real objection to the truth of the statement that the fauna of
each period as a whole is nearly intermediate in character between the
preceding and succeeding faunas, that certain genera offer exceptions
to the rule. For instance, the species of mastodons and elephants, when
arranged by Dr. Falconer in two series—in the first place according to
their mutual affinities, and in the second place according to their
periods of existence—do not accord in arrangement. The species extreme
in character are not the oldest or the most recent; nor are those which
are intermediate in character, intermediate in age. But supposing for
an instant, in this and other such cases, that the record of the first
appearance and disappearance of the species was complete, which is far
from the case, we have no reason to believe that forms successively
produced necessarily endure for corresponding lengths of time. A very
ancient form may occasionally have lasted much longer than a form
elsewhere subsequently produced, especially in the case of terrestrial
productions inhabiting separated districts. To compare small things
with great; if the principal living and extinct races of the domestic
pigeon were arranged in serial affinity, this arrangement would not
closely accord with the order in time of their production, and even
less with the order of their disappearance; for the parent rock-pigeon
still lives; and many varieties between the rock-pigeon and the carrier
have become extinct; and carriers which are extreme in the important
character of length of beak originated earlier than short-beaked
tumblers, which are at the opposite end of the series in this respect.

Closely connected with the statement, that the organic remains from an
intermediate formation are in some degree intermediate in character, is
the fact, insisted on by all palæontologists, that fossils from two
consecutive formations are far more closely related to each other, than
are the fossils from two remote formations. Pictet gives as a
well-known instance, the general resemblance of the organic remains
from the several stages of the Chalk formation, though the species are
distinct in each stage. This fact alone, from its generality, seems to
have shaken Professor Pictet in his belief in the immutability of
species. He who is acquainted with the distribution of existing species
over the globe, will not attempt to account for the close resemblance
of distinct species in closely consecutive formations, by the physical
conditions of the ancient areas having remained nearly the same. Let it
be remembered that the forms of life, at least those inhabiting the
sea, have changed almost simultaneously throughout the world, and
therefore under the most different climates and conditions. Consider
the prodigious vicissitudes of climate during the pleistocene period,
which includes the whole glacial epoch, and note how little the
specific forms of the inhabitants of the sea have been affected.

On the theory of descent, the full meaning of the fossil remains from
closely consecutive formations, being closely related, though ranked as
distinct species, is obvious. As the accumulation of each formation has
often been interrupted, and as long blank intervals have intervened
between successive formations, we ought not to expect to find, as I
attempted to show in the last chapter, in any one or in any two
formations, all the intermediate varieties between the species which
appeared at the commencement and close of these periods: but we ought
to find after intervals, very long as measured by years, but only
moderately long as measured geologically, closely allied forms, or, as
they have been called by some authors, representative species; and
these assuredly we do find. We find, in short, such evidence of the
slow and scarcely sensible mutations of specific forms, as we have the
right to expect.

_On the State of Development of Ancient compared with Living Forms._

We have seen in the fourth chapter that the degree of differentiation
and specialisation of the parts in organic beings, when arrived at
maturity, is the best standard, as yet suggested, of their degree of
perfection or highness. We have also seen that, as the specialisation
of parts is an advantage to each being, so natural selection will tend
to render the organisation of each being more specialised and perfect,
and in this sense higher; not but that it may leave many creatures with
simple and unimproved structures fitted for simple conditions of life,
and in some cases will even degrade or simplify the organisation, yet
leaving such degraded beings better fitted for their new walks of life.
In another and more general manner, new species become superior to
their predecessors; for they have to beat in the struggle for life all
the older forms, with which they come into close competition. We may
therefore conclude that if under a nearly similar climate the eocene
inhabitants of the world could be put into competition with the
existing inhabitants, the former would be beaten and exterminated by
the latter, as would the secondary by the eocene, and the palæozoic by
the secondary forms. So that by this fundamental test of victory in the
battle for life, as well as by the standard of the specialisation of
organs, modern forms ought, on the theory of natural selection, to
stand higher than ancient forms. Is this the case? A large majority of
palæontologists would answer in the affirmative; and it seems that this
answer must be admitted as true, though difficult of proof.

It is no valid objection to this conclusion, that certain Brachiopods
have been but slightly modified from an extremely remote geological
epoch; and that certain land and fresh-water shells have remained
nearly the same, from the time when, as far as is known, they first
appeared. It is not an insuperable difficulty that Foraminifera have
not, as insisted on by Dr. Carpenter, progressed in organisation since
even the Laurentian epoch; for some organisms would have to remain
fitted for simple conditions of life, and what could be better fitted
for this end than these lowly organised Protozoa? Such objections as
the above would be fatal to my view, if it included advance in
organisation as a necessary contingent. They would likewise be fatal,
if the above Foraminifera, for instance, could be proved to have first
come into existence during the Laurentian epoch, or the above
Brachiopods during the Cambrian formation; for in this case, there
would not have been time sufficient for the development of these
organisms up to the standard which they had then reached. When advanced
up to any given point, there is no necessity, on the theory of natural
selection, for their further continued process; though they will,
during each successive age, have to be slightly modified, so as to hold
their places in relation to slight changes in their conditions. The
foregoing objections hinge on the question whether we really know how
old the world is, and at what period the various forms of life first
appeared; and this may well be disputed.

The problem whether organisation on the whole has advanced is in many
ways excessively intricate. The geological record, at all times
imperfect, does not extend far enough back to show with unmistakable
clearness that within the known history of the world organisation has
largely advanced. Even at the present day, looking to members of the
same class, naturalists are not unanimous which forms ought to be
ranked as highest: thus, some look at the selaceans or sharks, from
their approach in some important points of structure to reptiles, as
the highest fish; others look at the teleosteans as the highest. The
ganoids stand intermediate between the selaceans and teleosteans; the
latter at the present day are largely preponderant in number; but
formerly selaceans and ganoids alone existed; and in this case,
according to the standard of highness chosen, so will it be said that
fishes have advanced or retrograded in organisation. To attempt to
compare members of distinct types in the scale of highness seems
hopeless; who will decide whether a cuttle-fish be higher than a
bee—that insect which the great Von Baer believed to be “in fact more
highly organised than a fish, although upon another type?” In the
complex struggle for life it is quite credible that crustaceans, not
very high in their own class, might beat cephalopods, the highest
molluscs; and such crustaceans, though not highly developed, would
stand very high in the scale of invertebrate animals, if judged by the
most decisive of all trials—the law of battle. Beside these inherent
difficulties in deciding which forms are the most advanced in
organisation, we ought not solely to compare the highest members of a
class at any two periods—though undoubtedly this is one and perhaps the
most important element in striking a balance—but we ought to compare
all the members, high and low, at two periods. At an ancient epoch the
highest and lowest molluscoidal animals, namely, cephalopods and
brachiopods, swarmed in numbers; at the present time both groups are
greatly reduced, while others, intermediate in organisation, have
largely increased; consequently some naturalists maintain that molluscs
were formerly more highly developed than at present; but a stronger
case can be made out on the opposite side, by considering the vast
reduction of brachiopods, and the fact that our existing cephalopods,
though few in number, are more highly organised than their ancient
representatives. We ought also to compare the relative proportional
numbers, at any two periods, of the high and low classes throughout the
world: if, for instance, at the present day fifty thousand kinds of
vertebrate animals exist, and if we knew that at some former period
only ten thousand kinds existed, we ought to look at this increase in
number in the highest class, which implies a great displacement of
lower forms, as a decided advance in the organisation of the world. We
thus see how hopelessly difficult it is to compare with perfect
fairness, under such extremely complex relations, the standard of
organisation of the imperfectly-known faunas of successive periods.

We shall appreciate this difficulty more clearly by looking to certain
existing faunas and floras. From the extraordinary manner in which
European productions have recently spread over New Zealand, and have
seized on places which must have been previously occupied by the
indigenes, we must believe, that if all the animals and plants of Great
Britain were set free in New Zealand, a multitude of British forms
would in the course of time become thoroughly naturalized there, and
would exterminate many of the natives. On the other hand, from the fact
that hardly a single inhabitant of the southern hemisphere has become
wild in any part of Europe, we may well doubt whether, if all the
productions of New Zealand were set free in Great Britain, any
considerable number would be enabled to seize on places now occupied by
our native plants and animals. Under this point of view, the
productions of Great Britain stand much higher in the scale than those
of New Zealand. Yet the most skilful naturalist, from an examination of
the species of the two countries, could not have foreseen this result.

Agassiz and several other highly competent judges insist that ancient
animals resemble to a certain extent the embryos of recent animals
belonging to the same classes; and that the geological succession of
extinct forms is nearly parallel with the embryological development of
existing forms. This view accords admirably well with our theory. In a
future chapter I shall attempt to show that the adult differs from its
embryo, owing to variations having supervened at a not early age, and
having been inherited at a corresponding age. This process, whilst it
leaves the embryo almost unaltered, continually adds, in the course of
successive generations, more and more difference to the adult. Thus the
embryo comes to be left as a sort of picture, preserved by nature, of
the former and less modified condition of the species. This view may be
true, and yet may never be capable of proof. Seeing, for instance, that
the oldest known mammals, reptiles, and fishes strictly belong to their
proper classes, though some of these old forms are in a slight degree
less distinct from each other than are the typical members of the same
groups at the present day, it would be vain to look for animals having
the common embryological character of the Vertebrata, until beds rich
in fossils are discovered far beneath the lowest Cambrian strata—a
discovery of which the chance is small.

_On the Succession of the same Types within the same Areas, during the
later Tertiary periods._

Mr. Clift many years ago showed that the fossil mammals from the
Australian caves were closely allied to the living marsupials of that
continent. In South America, a similar relationship is manifest, even
to an uneducated eye, in the gigantic pieces of armour, like those of
the armadillo, found in several parts of La Plata; and Professor Owen
has shown in the most striking manner that most of the fossil mammals,
buried there in such numbers, are related to South American types. This
relationship is even more clearly seen in the wonderful collection of
fossil bones made by MM. Lund and Clausen in the caves of Brazil. I was
so much impressed with these facts that I strongly insisted, in 1839
and 1845, on this “law of the succession of types,”—on “this wonderful
relationship in the same continent between the dead and the living.”
Professor Owen has subsequently extended the same generalisation to the
mammals of the Old World. We see the same law in this author’s
restorations of the extinct and gigantic birds of New Zealand. We see
it also in the birds of the caves of Brazil. Mr. Woodward has shown
that the same law holds good with sea-shells, but, from the wide
distribution of most molluscs, it is not well displayed by them. Other
cases could be added, as the relation between the extinct and living
land-shells of Madeira; and between the extinct and living brackish
water-shells of the Aralo-Caspian Sea.

Now, what does this remarkable law of the succession of the same types
within the same areas mean? He would be a bold man who, after comparing
the present climate of Australia and of parts of South America, under
the same latitude, would attempt to account, on the one hand through
dissimilar physical conditions, for the dissimilarity of the
inhabitants of these two continents; and, on the other hand through
similarity of conditions, for the uniformity of the same types in each
continent during the later tertiary periods. Nor can it be pretended
that it is an immutable law that marsupials should have been chiefly or
solely produced in Australia; or that Edentata and other American types
should have been solely produced in South America. For we know that
Europe in ancient times was peopled by numerous marsupials; and I have
shown in the publications above alluded to, that in America the law of
distribution of terrestrial mammals was formerly different from what it
now is. North America formerly partook strongly of the present
character of the southern half of the continent; and the southern half
was formerly more closely allied, than it is at present, to the
northern half. In a similar manner we know, from Falconer and Cautley’s
discoveries, that Northern India was formerly more closely related in
its mammals to Africa than it is at the present time. Analogous facts
could be given in relation to the distribution of marine animals.

On the theory of descent with modification, the great law of the long
enduring, but not immutable, succession of the same types within the
same areas, is at once explained; for the inhabitants of each quarter
of the world will obviously tend to leave in that quarter, during the
next succeeding period of time, closely allied though in some degree
modified descendants. If the inhabitants of one continent formerly
differed greatly from those of another continent, so will their
modified descendants still differ in nearly the same manner and degree.
But after very long intervals of time, and after great geographical
changes, permitting much intermigration, the feebler will yield to the
more dominant forms, and there will be nothing immutable in the
distribution of organic beings.

It may be asked in ridicule whether I suppose that the megatherium and
other allied huge monsters, which formerly lived in South America, have
left behind them the sloth, armadillo, and anteater, as their
degenerate descendants. This cannot for an instant be admitted. These
huge animals have become wholly extinct, and have left no progeny. But
in the caves of Brazil there are many extinct species which are closely
allied in size and in all other characters to the species still living
in South America; and some of these fossils may have been the actual
progenitors of the living species. It must not be forgotten that, on
our theory, all the species of the same genus are the descendants of
some one species; so that, if six genera, each having eight species, be
found in one geological formation, and in a succeeding formation there
be six other allied or representative genera, each with the same number
of species, then we may conclude that generally only one species of
each of the older genera has left modified descendants, which
constitute the new genera containing the several species; the other
seven species of each old genus having died out and left no progeny.
Or, and this will be a far commoner case, two or three species in two
or three alone of the six older genera will be the parents of the new
genera: the other species and the other old genera having become
utterly extinct. In failing orders, with the genera and species
decreasing in numbers as is the case with the Edentata of South
America, still fewer genera and species will leave modified
blood-descendants.

_Summary of the preceding and present Chapters._

I have attempted to show that the geological record is extremely
imperfect; that only a small portion of the globe has been geologically
explored with care; that only certain classes of organic beings have
been largely preserved in a fossil state; that the number both of
specimens and of species, preserved in our museums, is absolutely as
nothing compared with the number of generations which must have passed
away even during a single formation; that, owing to subsidence being
almost necessary for the accumulation of deposits rich in fossil
species of many kinds, and thick enough to outlast future degradation,
great intervals of time must have elapsed between most of our
successive formations; that there has probably been more extinction
during the periods of subsidence, and more variation during the periods
of elevation, and during the latter the record will have been least
perfectly kept; that each single formation has not been continuously
deposited; that the duration of each formation is probably short
compared with the average duration of specific forms; that migration
has played an important part in the first appearance of new forms in
any one area and formation; that widely ranging species are those which
have varied most frequently, and have oftenest given rise to new
species; that varieties have at first been local; and lastly, although
each species must have passed through numerous transitional stages, it
is probable that the periods, during which each underwent modification,
though many and long as measured by years, have been short in
comparison with the periods during which each remained in an unchanged
condition. These causes, taken conjointly, will to a large extent
explain why—though we do find many links—we do not find interminable
varieties, connecting together all extinct and existing forms by the
finest graduated steps. It should also be constantly borne in mind that
any linking variety between two forms, which might be found, would be
ranked, unless the whole chain could be perfectly restored, as a new
and distinct species; for it is not pretended that we have any sure
criterion by which species and varieties can be discriminated.

He who rejects this view of the imperfection of the geological record,
will rightly reject the whole theory. For he may ask in vain where are
the numberless transitional links which must formerly have connected
the closely allied or representative species, found in the successive
stages of the same great formation? He may disbelieve in the immense
intervals of time which must have elapsed between our consecutive
formations; he may overlook how important a part migration has played,
when the formations of any one great region, as those of Europe, are
considered; he may urge the apparent, but often falsely apparent,
sudden coming in of whole groups of species. He may ask where are the
remains of those infinitely numerous organisms which must have existed
long before the Cambrian system was deposited? We now know that at
least one animal did then exist; but I can answer this last question
only by supposing that where our oceans now extend they have extended
for an enormous period, and where our oscillating continents now stand
they have stood since the commencement of the Cambrian system; but
that, long before that epoch, the world presented a widely different
aspect; and that the older continents, formed of formations older than
any known to us, exist now only as remnants in a metamorphosed
condition, or lie still buried under the ocean.

Passing from these difficulties, the other great leading facts in
palæontology agree admirably with the theory of descent with
modification through variation and natural selection. We can thus
understand how it is that new species come in slowly and successively;
how species of different classes do not necessarily change together, or
at the same rate, or in the same degree; yet in the long run that all
undergo modification to some extent. The extinction of old forms is the
almost inevitable consequence of the production of new forms. We can
understand why, when a species has once disappeared, it never
reappears. Groups of species increase in numbers slowly, and endure for
unequal periods of time; for the process of modification is necessarily
slow, and depends on many complex contingencies. The dominant species
belonging to large and dominant groups tend to leave many modified
descendants, which form new sub-groups and groups. As these are formed,
the species of the less vigorous groups, from their inferiority
inherited from a common progenitor, tend to become extinct together,
and to leave no modified offspring on the face of the earth. But the
utter extinction of a whole group of species has sometimes been a slow
process, from the survival of a few descendants, lingering in protected
and isolated situations. When a group has once wholly disappeared, it
does not reappear; for the link of generation has been broken.

We can understand how it is that dominant forms which spread widely and
yield the greatest number of varieties tend to people the world with
allied, but modified, descendants; and these will generally succeed in
displacing the groups which are their inferiors in the struggle for
existence. Hence, after long intervals of time, the productions of the
world appear to have changed simultaneously.

We can understand how it is that all the forms of life, ancient and
recent, make together a few grand classes. We can understand, from the
continued tendency to divergence of character, why the more ancient a
form is, the more it generally differs from those now living. Why
ancient and extinct forms often tend to fill up gaps between existing
forms, sometimes blending two groups, previously classed as distinct
into one; but more commonly bringing them only a little closer
together. The more ancient a form is, the more often it stands in some
degree intermediate between groups now distinct; for the more ancient a
form is, the more nearly it will be related to, and consequently
resemble, the common progenitor of groups, since become widely
divergent. Extinct forms are seldom directly intermediate between
existing forms; but are intermediate only by a long and circuitous
course through other extinct and different forms. We can clearly see
why the organic remains of closely consecutive formations are closely
allied; for they are closely linked together by generation. We can
clearly see why the remains of an intermediate formation are
intermediate in character.

The inhabitants of the world at each successive period in its history
have beaten their predecessors in the race for life, and are, in so
far, higher in the scale, and their structure has generally become more
specialised; and this may account for the common belief held by so many
palæontologists, that organisation on the whole has progressed. Extinct
and ancient animals resemble to a certain extent the embryos of the
more recent animals belonging to the same classes, and this wonderful
fact receives a simple explanation according to our views. The
succession of the same types of structure within the same areas during
the later geological periods ceases to be mysterious, and is
intelligible on the principle of inheritance.

If, then, the geological record be as imperfect as many believe, and it
may at least be asserted that the record cannot be proved to be much
more perfect, the main objections to the theory of natural selection
are greatly diminished or disappear. On the other hand, all the chief
laws of palæontology plainly proclaim, as it seems to me, that species
have been produced by ordinary generation: old forms having been
supplanted by new and improved forms of life, the products of variation
and the survival of the fittest.

CHAPTER XII.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.

Present distribution cannot be accounted for by differences in physical
conditions—Importance of barriers—Affinity of the productions of the
same continent—Centres of creation—Means of dispersal by changes of
climate and of the level of the land, and by occasional means—Dispersal
during the Glacial period—Alternate Glacial periods in the North and
South.

In considering the distribution of organic beings over the face of the
globe, the first great fact which strikes us is, that neither the
similarity nor the dissimilarity of the inhabitants of various regions
can be wholly accounted for by climatal and other physical conditions.
Of late, almost every author who has studied the subject has come to
this conclusion. The case of America alone would almost suffice to
prove its truth; for if we exclude the arctic and northern temperate
parts, all authors agree that one of the most fundamental divisions in
geographical distribution is that between the New and Old Worlds; yet
if we travel over the vast American continent, from the central parts
of the United States to its extreme southern point, we meet with the
most diversified conditions; humid districts, arid deserts, lofty
mountains, grassy plains, forests, marshes, lakes and great rivers,
under almost every temperature. There is hardly a climate or condition
in the Old World which cannot be paralleled in the New—at least so
closely as the same species generally require. No doubt small areas can
be pointed out in the Old World hotter than any in the New World; but
these are not inhabited by a fauna different from that of the
surrounding districts; for it is rare to find a group of organisms
confined to a small area, of which the conditions are peculiar in only
a slight degree. Notwithstanding this general parallelism in the
conditions of Old and New Worlds, how widely different are their living
productions!

In the southern hemisphere, if we compare large tracts of land in
Australia, South Africa, and western South America, between latitudes
25° and 35°, we shall find parts extremely similar in all their
conditions, yet it would not be possible to point out three faunas and
floras more utterly dissimilar. Or, again, we may compare the
productions of South America south of latitude 35° with those north of
25°, which consequently are separated by a space of ten degrees of
latitude, and are exposed to considerably different conditions; yet
they are incomparably more closely related to each other than they are
to the productions of Australia or Africa under nearly the same
climate. Analogous facts could be given with respect to the inhabitants
of the sea.

A second great fact which strikes us in our general review is, that
barriers of any kind, or obstacles to free migration, are related in a
close and important manner to the differences between the productions
of various regions. We see this in the great difference in nearly all
the terrestrial productions of the New and Old Worlds, excepting in the
northern parts, where the land almost joins, and where, under a
slightly different climate, there might have been free migration for
the northern temperate forms, as there now is for the strictly arctic
productions. We see the same fact in the great difference between the
inhabitants of Australia, Africa, and South America under the same
latitude; for these countries are almost as much isolated from each
other as is possible. On each continent, also, we see the same fact;
for on the opposite sides of lofty and continuous mountain-ranges, and
of great deserts and even of large rivers, we find different
productions; though as mountain chains, deserts, &c., are not as
impassable, or likely to have endured so long, as the oceans separating
continents, the differences are very inferior in degree to those
characteristic of distinct continents.

Turning to the sea, we find the same law. The marine inhabitants of the
eastern and western shores of South America are very distinct, with
extremely few shells, crustacea, or echinodermata in common; but Dr.
Günther has recently shown that about thirty per cent of the fishes are
the same on the opposite sides of the isthmus of Panama; and this fact
has led naturalists to believe that the isthmus was formerly open.
Westward of the shores of America, a wide space of open ocean extends,
with not an island as a halting-place for emigrants; here we have a
barrier of another kind, and as soon as this is passed we meet in the
eastern islands of the Pacific with another and totally distinct fauna.
So that three marine faunas range northward and southward in parallel
lines not far from each other, under corresponding climate; but from
being separated from each other by impassable barriers, either of land
or open sea, they are almost wholly distinct. On the other hand,
proceeding still farther westward from the eastern islands of the
tropical parts of the Pacific, we encounter no impassable barriers, and
we have innumerable islands as halting-places, or continuous coasts,
until, after travelling over a hemisphere, we come to the shores of
Africa; and over this vast space we meet with no well-defined and
distinct marine faunas. Although so few marine animals are common to
the above-named three approximate faunas of Eastern and Western America
and the eastern Pacific islands, yet many fishes range from the Pacific
into the Indian Ocean, and many shells are common to the eastern
islands of the Pacific and the eastern shores of Africa on almost
exactly opposite meridians of longitude.

A third great fact, partly included in the foregoing statement, is the
affinity of the productions of the same continent or of the same sea,
though the species themselves are distinct at different points and
stations. It is a law of the widest generality, and every continent
offers innumerable instances. Nevertheless, the naturalist, in
travelling, for instance, from north to south, never fails to be struck
by the manner in which successive groups of beings, specifically
distinct, though nearly related, replace each other. He hears from
closely allied, yet distinct kinds of birds, notes nearly similar, and
sees their nests similarly constructed, but not quite alike, with eggs
coloured in nearly the same manner. The plains near the Straits of
Magellan are inhabited by one species of Rhea (American ostrich), and
northward the plains of La Plata by another species of the same genus;
and not by a true ostrich or emu, like those inhabiting Africa and
Australia under the same latitude. On these same plains of La Plata we
see the agouti and bizcacha, animals having nearly the same habits as
our hares and rabbits, and belonging to the same order of Rodents, but
they plainly display an American type of structure. We ascend the lofty
peaks of the Cordillera, and we find an alpine species of bizcacha; we
look to the waters, and we do not find the beaver or muskrat, but the
coypu and capybara, rodents of the South American type. Innumerable
other instances could be given. If we look to the islands off the
American shore, however much they may differ in geological structure,
the inhabitants are essentially American, though they may be all
peculiar species. We may look back to past ages, as shown in the last
chapter, and we find American types then prevailing on the American
continent and in the American seas. We see in these facts some deep
organic bond, throughout space and time, over the same areas of land
and water, independently of physical conditions. The naturalist must be
dull who is not led to inquire what this bond is.

The bond is simply inheritance, that cause which alone, as far as we
positively know, produces organisms quite like each other, or, as we
see in the case of varieties, nearly alike. The dissimilarity of the
inhabitants of different regions may be attributed to modification
through variation and natural selection, and probably in a subordinate
degree to the definite influence of different physical conditions. The
degrees of dissimilarity will depend on the migration of the more
dominant forms of life from one region into another having been more or
less effectually prevented, at periods more or less remote—on the
nature and number of the former immigrants—and on the action of the
inhabitants on each other in leading to the preservation of different
modifications; the relation of organism to organism in the struggle for
life being, as I have already often remarked, the most important of all
relations. Thus the high importance of barriers comes into play by
checking migration; as does time for the slow process of modification
through natural selection. Widely-ranging species, abounding in
individuals, which have already triumphed over many competitors in
their own widely-extended homes, will have the best chance of seizing
on new places, when they spread out into new countries. In their new
homes they will be exposed to new conditions, and will frequently
undergo further modification and improvement; and thus they will become
still further victorious, and will produce groups of modified
descendants. On this principle of inheritance with modification we can
understand how it is that sections of genera, whole genera, and even
families, are confined to the same areas, as is so commonly and
notoriously the case.

There is no evidence, as was remarked in the last chapter, of the
existence of any law of necessary development. As the variability of
each species is an independent property, and will be taken advantage of
by natural selection, only so far as it profits each individual in its
complex struggle for life, so the amount of modification in different
species will be no uniform quantity. If a number of species, after
having long competed with each other in their old home, were to migrate
in a body into a new and afterwards isolated country, they would be
little liable to modification; for neither migration nor isolation in
themselves effect anything. These principles come into play only by
bringing organisms into new relations with each other and in a lesser
degree with the surrounding physical conditions. As we have seen in the
last chapter that some forms have retained nearly the same character
from an enormously remote geological period, so certain species have
migrated over vast spaces, and have not become greatly or at all
modified.

According to these views, it is obvious that the several species of the
same genus, though inhabiting the most distant quarters of the world,
must originally have proceeded from the same source, as they are
descended from the same progenitor. In the case of those species which
have undergone, during whole geological periods, little modification,
there is not much difficulty in believing that they have migrated from
the same region; for during the vast geographical and climatical
changes which have supervened since ancient times, almost any amount of
migration is possible. But in many other cases, in which we have reason
to believe that the species of a genus have been produced within
comparatively recent times, there is great difficulty on this head. It
is also obvious that the individuals of the same species, though now
inhabiting distant and isolated regions, must have proceeded from one
spot, where their parents were first produced: for, as has been
explained, it is incredible that individuals identically the same
should have been produced from parents specifically distinct.

_Single Centres of supposed Creation._—We are thus brought to the
question which has been largely discussed by naturalists, namely,
whether species have been created at one or more points of the earth’s
surface. Undoubtedly there are many cases of extreme difficulty in
understanding how the same species could possibly have migrated from
some one point to the several distant and isolated points, where now
found. Nevertheless the simplicity of the view that each species was
first produced within a single region captivates the mind. He who
rejects it, rejects the vera causa of ordinary generation with
subsequent migration, and calls in the agency of a miracle. It is
universally admitted, that in most cases the area inhabited by a
species is continuous; and that when a plant or animal inhabits two
points so distant from each other, or with an interval of such a
nature, that the space could not have been easily passed over by
migration, the fact is given as something remarkable and exceptional.
The incapacity of migrating across a wide sea is more clear in the case
of terrestrial mammals than perhaps with any other organic beings; and,
accordingly, we find no inexplicable instances of the same mammals
inhabiting distant points of the world. No geologist feels any
difficulty in Great Britain possessing the same quadrupeds with the
rest of Europe, for they were no doubt once united. But if the same
species can be produced at two separate points, why do we not find a
single mammal common to Europe and Australia or South America? The
conditions of life are nearly the same, so that a multitude of European
animals and plants have become naturalised in America and Australia;
and some of the aboriginal plants are identically the same at these
distant points of the northern and southern hemispheres? The answer, as
I believe, is, that mammals have not been able to migrate, whereas some
plants, from their varied means of dispersal, have migrated across the
wide and broken interspaces. The great and striking influence of
barriers of all kinds, is intelligible only on the view that the great
majority of species have been produced on one side, and have not been
able to migrate to the opposite side. Some few families, many
subfamilies, very many genera, a still greater number of sections of
genera, are confined to a single region; and it has been observed by
several naturalists that the most natural genera, or those genera in
which the species are most closely related to each other, are generally
confined to the same country, or if they have a wide range that their
range is continuous. What a strange anomaly it would be if a directly
opposite rule were to prevail when we go down one step lower in the
series, namely to the individuals of the same species, and these had
not been, at least at first, confined to some one region!

Hence, it seems to me, as it has to many other naturalists, that the
view of each species having been produced in one area alone, and having
subsequently migrated from that area as far as its powers of migration
and subsistence under past and present conditions permitted, is the
most probable. Undoubtedly many cases occur in which we cannot explain
how the same species could have passed from one point to the other. But
the geographical and climatical changes which have certainly occurred
within recent geological times, must have rendered discontinuous the
formerly continuous range of many species. So that we are reduced to
consider whether the exceptions to continuity of range are so numerous,
and of so grave a nature, that we ought to give up the belief, rendered
probable by general considerations, that each species has been produced
within one area, and has migrated thence as far as it could. It would
be hopelessly tedious to discuss all the exceptional cases of the same
species, now living at distant and separated points; nor do I for a
moment pretend that any explanation could be offered of many instances.
But, after some preliminary remarks, I will discuss a few of the most
striking classes of facts, namely, the existence of the same species on
the summits of distant mountain ranges, and at distant points in the
Arctic and Antarctic regions; and secondly (in the following chapter),
the wide distribution of fresh water productions; and thirdly, the
occurrence of the same terrestrial species on islands and on the
nearest mainland, though separated by hundreds of miles of open sea. If
the existence of the same species at distant and isolated points of the
earth’s surface can in many instances be explained on the view of each
species having migrated from a single birthplace; then, considering our
ignorance with respect to former climatical and geographical changes,
and to the various occasional means of transport, the belief that a
single birthplace is the law seems to me incomparably the safest.

In discussing this subject we shall be enabled at the same time to
consider a point equally important for us, namely, whether the several
species of a genus which must on our theory all be descended from a
common progenitor, can have migrated, undergoing modification during
their migration from some one area. If, when most of the species
inhabiting one region are different from those of another region,
though closely allied to them, it can be shown that migration from the
one region to the other has probably occurred at some former period,
our general view will be much strengthened; for the explanation is
obvious on the principle of descent with modification. A volcanic
island, for instance, upheaved and formed at the distance of a few
hundreds of miles from a continent, would probably receive from it in
the course of time a few colonists, and their descendants, though
modified, would still be related by inheritance to the inhabitants of
that continent. Cases of this nature are common, and are, as we shall
hereafter see, inexplicable on the theory of independent creation. This
view of the relation of the species of one region to those of another,
does not differ much from that advanced by Mr. Wallace, who concludes
that “every species has come into existence coincident both in space
and time with a pre-existing closely allied species.” And it is now
well known that he attributes this coincidence to descent with
modification.

The question of single or multiple centres of creation differs from
another though allied question, namely, whether all the individuals of
the same species are descended from a single pair, or single
hermaphrodite, or whether, as some authors suppose, from many
individuals simultaneously created. With organic beings which never
intercross, if such exist, each species, must be descended from a
succession of modified varieties, that have supplanted each other, but
have never blended with other individuals or varieties of the same
species, so that, at each successive stage of modification, all the
individuals of the same form will be descended from a single parent.
But in the great majority of cases, namely, with all organisms which
habitually unite for each birth, or which occasionally intercross, the
individuals of the same species inhabiting the same area will be kept
nearly uniform by intercrossing; so that many individuals will go on
simultaneously changing, and the whole amount of modification at each
stage will not be due to descent from a single parent. To illustrate
what I mean: our English race-horses differ from the horses of every
other breed; but they do not owe their difference and superiority to
descent from any single pair, but to continued care in the selecting
and training of many individuals during each generation.

Before discussing the three classes of facts, which I have selected as
presenting the greatest amount of difficulty on the theory of “single
centres of creation,” I must say a few words on the means of dispersal.

_Means of Dispersal._

Sir C. Lyell and other authors have ably treated this subject. I can
give here only the briefest abstract of the more important facts.
Change of climate must have had a powerful influence on migration. A
region now impassable to certain organisms from the nature of its
climate, might have been a high road for migration, when the climate
was different. I shall, however, presently have to discuss this branch
of the subject in some detail. Changes of level in the land must also
have been highly influential: a narrow isthmus now separates two marine
faunas; submerge it, or let it formerly have been submerged, and the
two faunas will now blend together, or may formerly have blended. Where
the sea now extends, land may at a former period have connected islands
or possibly even continents together, and thus have allowed terrestrial
productions to pass from one to the other. No geologist disputes that
great mutations of level have occurred within the period of existing
organisms. Edward Forbes insisted that all the islands in the Atlantic
must have been recently connected with Europe or Africa, and Europe
likewise with America. Other authors have thus hypothetically bridged
over every ocean, and united almost every island with some mainland.
If, indeed, the arguments used by Forbes are to be trusted, it must be
admitted that scarcely a single island exists which has not recently
been united to some continent. This view cuts the Gordian knot of the
dispersal of the same species to the most distant points, and removes
many a difficulty; but to the best of my judgment we are not authorized
in admitting such enormous geographical changes within the period of
existing species. It seems to me that we have abundant evidence of
great oscillations in the level of the land or sea; but not of such
vast changes in the position and extension of our continents, as to
have united them within the recent period to each other and to the
several intervening oceanic islands. I freely admit the former
existence of many islands, now buried beneath the sea, which may have
served as halting-places for plants and for many animals during their
migration. In the coral-producing oceans such sunken islands are now
marked by rings of coral or atolls standing over them. Whenever it is
fully admitted, as it will some day be, that each species has proceeded
from a single birthplace, and when in the course of time we know
something definite about the means of distribution, we shall be enabled
to speculate with security on the former extension of the land. But I
do not believe that it will ever be proved that within the recent
period most of our continents which now stand quite separate, have been
continuously, or almost continuously united with each other, and with
the many existing oceanic islands. Several facts in distribution—such
as the great difference in the marine faunas on the opposite sides of
almost every continent—the close relation of the tertiary inhabitants
of several lands and even seas to their present inhabitants—the degree
of affinity between the mammals inhabiting islands with those of the
nearest continent, being in part determined (as we shall hereafter see)
by the depth of the intervening ocean—these and other such facts are
opposed to the admission of such prodigious geographical revolutions
within the recent period, as are necessary on the view advanced by
Forbes and admitted by his followers. The nature and relative
proportions of the inhabitants of oceanic islands are likewise opposed
to the belief of their former continuity of continents. Nor does the
almost universally volcanic composition of such islands favour the
admission that they are the wrecks of sunken continents; if they had
originally existed as continental mountain ranges, some at least of the
islands would have been formed, like other mountain summits, of
granite, metamorphic schists, old fossiliferous and other rocks,
instead of consisting of mere piles of volcanic matter.

I must now say a few words on what are called accidental means, but
which more properly should be called occasional means of distribution.
I shall here confine myself to plants. In botanical works, this or that
plant is often stated to be ill adapted for wide dissemination; but the
greater or less facilities for transport across the sea may be said to
be almost wholly unknown. Until I tried, with Mr. Berkeley’s aid, a few
experiments, it was not even known how far seeds could resist the
injurious action of sea-water. To my surprise I found that out of
eighty-seven kinds, sixty-four germinated after an immersion of
twenty-eight days, and a few survived an immersion of 137 days. It
deserves notice that certain orders were far more injured than others:
nine Leguminosæ were tried, and, with one exception, they resisted the
salt-water badly; seven species of the allied orders, Hydrophyllaceæ
and Polemoniaceæ, were all killed by a month’s immersion. For
convenience’ sake I chiefly tried small seeds without the capsules or
fruit; and as all of these sank in a few days, they could not have been
floated across wide spaces of the sea, whether or not they were injured
by salt water. Afterwards I tried some larger fruits, capsules, &c.,
and some of these floated for a long time. It is well known what a
difference there is in the buoyancy of green and seasoned timber; and
it occurred to me that floods would often wash into the sea dried
plants or branches with seed-capsules or fruit attached to them. Hence
I was led to dry the stems and branches of ninety-four plants with ripe
fruit, and to place them on sea-water. The majority sank quickly, but
some which, whilst green, floated for a very short time, when dried
floated much longer; for instance, ripe hazel-nuts sank immediately,
but when dried they floated for ninety days, and afterwards when
planted germinated; an asparagus plant with ripe berries floated for
twenty-three days, when dried it floated for eighty-five days, and the
seeds afterwards germinated: the ripe seeds of Helosciadium sank in two
days, when dried they floated for above ninety days, and afterwards
germinated. Altogether, out of the ninety-four dried plants, eighteen
floated for above twenty-eight days; and some of the eighteen floated
for a very much longer period. So that as 64/87 kinds of seeds
germinated after an immersion of twenty-eight days; and as 18/94
distinct species with ripe fruit (but not all the same species as in
the foregoing experiment) floated, after being dried, for above
twenty-eight days, we may conclude, as far as anything can be inferred
from these scanty facts, that the seeds of 14/100 kinds of plants of
any country might be floated by sea-currents during twenty-eight days,
and would retain their power of germination. In Johnston’s Physical
Atlas, the average rate of the several Atlantic currents is
thirty-three miles per diem (some currents running at the rate of sixty
miles per diem); on this average, the seeds of 14/100 plants belonging
to one country might be floated across 924 miles of sea to another
country; and when stranded, if blown by an inland gale to a favourable
spot, would germinate.

Subsequently to my experiments, M. Martens tried similar ones, but in a
much better manner, for he placed the seeds in a box in the actual sea,
so that they were alternately wet and exposed to the air like really
floating plants. He tried ninety-eight seeds, mostly different from
mine, but he chose many large fruits, and likewise seeds, from plants
which live near the sea; and this would have favoured both the average
length of their flotation and their resistance to the injurious action
of the salt-water. On the other hand, he did not previously dry the
plants or branches with the fruit; and this, as we have seen, would
have caused some of them to have floated much longer. The result was
that 18/98 of his seeds of different kinds floated for forty-two days,
and were then capable of germination. But I do not doubt that plants
exposed to the waves would float for a less time than those protected
from violent movement as in our experiments. Therefore, it would
perhaps be safer to assume that the seeds of about 10/100 plants of a
flora, after having been dried, could be floated across a space of sea
900 miles in width, and would then germinate. The fact of the larger
fruits often floating longer than the small, is interesting; as plants
with large seeds or fruit which, as Alph. de Candolle has shown,
generally have restricted ranges, could hardly be transported by any
other means.

Seeds may be occasionally transported in another manner. Drift timber
is thrown up on most islands, even on those in the midst of the widest
oceans; and the natives of the coral islands in the Pacific procure
stones for their tools, solely from the roots of drifted trees, these
stones being a valuable royal tax. I find that when irregularly shaped
stones are embedded in the roots of trees, small parcels of earth are
very frequently enclosed in their interstices and behind them, so
perfectly that not a particle could be washed away during the longest
transport: out of one small portion of earth thus _completely_ enclosed
by the roots of an oak about fifty years old, three dicotyledonous
plants germinated: I am certain of the accuracy of this observation.
Again, I can show that the carcasses of birds, when floating on the
sea, sometimes escape being immediately devoured; and many kinds of
seeds in the crops of floating birds long retain their vitality: peas
and vetches, for instance, are killed by even a few days’ immersion in
sea-water; but some taken out of the crop of a pigeon, which had
floated on artificial sea-water for thirty days, to my surprise nearly
all germinated.

Living birds can hardly fail to be highly effective agents in the
transportation of seeds. I could give many facts showing how frequently
birds of many kinds are blown by gales to vast distances across the
ocean. We may safely assume that under such circumstances their rate of
flight would often be thirty-five miles an hour; and some authors have
given a far higher estimate. I have never seen an instance of
nutritious seeds passing through the intestines of a bird; but hard
seeds of fruit pass uninjured through even the digestive organs of a
turkey. In the course of two months, I picked up in my garden twelve
kinds of seeds, out of the excrement of small birds, and these seemed
perfect, and some of them, which were tried, germinated. But the
following fact is more important: the crops of birds do not secrete
gastric juice, and do not, as I know by trial, injure in the least the
germination of seeds; now, after a bird has found and devoured a large
supply of food, it is positively asserted that all the grains do not
pass into the gizzard for twelve or even eighteen hours. A bird in this
interval might easily be blown to the distance of five hundred miles,
and hawks are known to look out for tired birds, and the contents of
their torn crops might thus readily get scattered. Some hawks and owls
bolt their prey whole, and after an interval of from twelve to twenty
hours, disgorge pellets, which, as I know from experiments made in the
Zoological Gardens, include seeds capable of germination. Some seeds of
the oat, wheat, millet, canary, hemp, clover, and beet germinated after
having been from twelve to twenty-one hours in the stomachs of
different birds of prey; and two seeds of beet grew after having been
thus retained for two days and fourteen hours. Fresh-water fish, I
find, eat seeds of many land and water plants; fish are frequently
devoured by birds, and thus the seeds might be transported from place
to place. I forced many kinds of seeds into the stomachs of dead fish,
and then gave their bodies to fishing-eagles, storks, and pelicans;
these birds, after an interval of many hours, either rejected the seeds
in pellets or passed them in their excrement; and several of these
seeds retained the power of germination. Certain seeds, however, were
always killed by this process.

Locusts are sometimes blown to great distances from the land. I myself
caught one 370 miles from the coast of Africa, and have heard of others
caught at greater distances. The Rev. R.T. Lowe informed Sir C. Lyell
that in November, 1844, swarms of locusts visited the island of
Madeira. They were in countless numbers, as thick as the flakes of snow
in the heaviest snowstorm, and extended upward as far as could be seen
with a telescope. During two or three days they slowly careered round
and round in an immense ellipse, at least five or six miles in
diameter, and at night alighted on the taller trees, which were
completely coated with them. They then disappeared over the sea, as
suddenly as they had appeared, and have not since visited the island.
Now, in parts of Natal it is believed by some farmers, though on
insufficient evidence, that injurious seeds are introduced into their
grass-land in the dung left by the great flights of locusts which often
visit that country. In consequence of this belief Mr. Weale sent me in
a letter a small packet of the dried pellets, out of which I extracted
under the microscope several seeds, and raised from them seven grass
plants, belonging to two species, of two genera. Hence a swarm of
locusts, such as that which visited Madeira, might readily be the means
of introducing several kinds of plants into an island lying far from
the mainland.

Although the beaks and feet of birds are generally clean, earth
sometimes adheres to them: in one case I removed sixty-one grains, and
in another case twenty-two grains of dry argillaceous earth from the
foot of a partridge, and in the earth there was a pebble as large as
the seed of a vetch. Here is a better case: the leg of a woodcock was
sent to me by a friend, with a little cake of dry earth attached to the
shank, weighing only nine grains; and this contained a seed of the
toad-rush (Juncus bufonius) which germinated and flowered. Mr.
Swaysland, of Brighton, who during the last forty years has paid close
attention to our migratory birds, informs me that he has often shot
wagtails (Motacillæ), wheatears, and whinchats (Saxicolæ), on their
first arrival on our shores, before they had alighted; and he has
several times noticed little cakes of earth attached to their feet.
Many facts could be given showing how generally soil is charged with
seeds. For instance, Professor Newton sent me the leg of a red-legged
partridge (Caccabis rufa) which had been wounded and could not fly,
with a ball of hard earth adhering to it, and weighing six and a half
ounces. The earth had been kept for three years, but when broken,
watered and placed under a bell glass, no less than eighty-two plants
sprung from it: these consisted of twelve monocotyledons, including the
common oat, and at least one kind of grass, and of seventy
dicotyledons, which consisted, judging from the young leaves, of at
least three distinct species. With such facts before us, can we doubt
that the many birds which are annually blown by gales across great
spaces of ocean, and which annually migrate—for instance, the millions
of quails across the Mediterranean—must occasionally transport a few
seeds embedded in dirt adhering to their feet or beaks? But I shall
have to recur to this subject.

As icebergs are known to be sometimes loaded with earth and stones, and
have even carried brushwood, bones, and the nest of a land-bird, it can
hardly be doubted that they must occasionally, as suggested by Lyell,
have transported seeds from one part to another of the arctic and
antarctic regions; and during the Glacial period from one part of the
now temperate regions to another. In the Azores, from the large number
of plants common to Europe, in comparison with the species on the other
islands of the Atlantic, which stand nearer to the mainland, and (as
remarked by Mr. H.C. Watson) from their somewhat northern character, in
comparison with the latitude, I suspected that these islands had been
partly stocked by ice-borne seeds during the Glacial epoch. At my
request Sir C. Lyell wrote to M. Hartung to inquire whether he had
observed erratic boulders on these islands, and he answered that he had
found large fragments of granite and other rocks, which do not occur in
the archipelago. Hence we may safely infer that icebergs formerly
landed their rocky burdens on the shores of these mid-ocean islands,
and it is at least possible that they may have brought thither the
seeds of northern plants.

Considering that these several means of transport, and that other
means, which without doubt remain to be discovered, have been in action
year after year for tens of thousands of years, it would, I think, be a
marvellous fact if many plants had not thus become widely transported.
These means of transport are sometimes called accidental, but this is
not strictly correct: the currents of the sea are not accidental, nor
is the direction of prevalent gales of wind. It should be observed that
scarcely any means of transport would carry seeds for very great
distances; for seeds do not retain their vitality when exposed for a
great length of time to the action of sea water; nor could they be long
carried in the crops or intestines of birds. These means, however,
would suffice for occasional transport across tracts of sea some
hundred miles in breadth, or from island to island, or from a continent
to a neighbouring island, but not from one distant continent to
another. The floras of distant continents would not by such means
become mingled; but would remain as distinct as they now are. The
currents, from their course, would never bring seeds from North America
to Britain, though they might and do bring seeds from the West Indies
to our western shores, where, if not killed by their very long
immersion in salt water, they could not endure our climate. Almost
every year, one or two land-birds are blown across the whole Atlantic
Ocean, from North America to the western shores of Ireland and England;
but seeds could be transported by these rare wanderers only by one
means, namely, by dirt adhering to their feet or beaks, which is in
itself a rare accident. Even in this case, how small would be the
chance of a seed falling on favourable soil, and coming to maturity!
But it would be a great error to argue that because a well-stocked
island, like Great Britain, has not, as far as is known (and it would
be very difficult to prove this), received within the last few
centuries, through occasional means of transport, immigrants from
Europe or any other continent, that a poorly-stocked island, though
standing more remote from the mainland, would not receive colonists by
similar means. Out of a hundred kinds of seeds or animals transported
to an island, even if far less well-stocked than Britain, perhaps not
more than one would be so well fitted to its new home, as to become
naturalised. But this is no valid argument against what would be
effected by occasional means of transport, during the long lapse of
geological time, whilst the island was being upheaved, and before it
had become fully stocked with inhabitants. On almost bare land, with
few or no destructive insects or birds living there, nearly every seed
which chanced to arrive, if fitted for the climate, would germinate and
survive.

_Dispersal during the Glacial Period._

The identity of many plants and animals, on mountain-summits, separated
from each other by hundreds of miles of lowlands, where Alpine species
could not possibly exist, is one of the most striking cases known of
the same species living at distant points, without the apparent
possibility of their having migrated from one point to the other. It is
indeed a remarkable fact to see so many plants of the same species
living on the snowy regions of the Alps or Pyrenees, and in the extreme
northern parts of Europe; but it is far more remarkable, that the
plants on the White Mountains, in the United States of America, are all
the same with those of Labrador, and nearly all the same, as we hear
from Asa Gray, with those on the loftiest mountains of Europe. Even as
long ago as 1747, such facts led Gmelin to conclude that the same
species must have been independently created at many distinct points;
and we might have remained in this same belief, had not Agassiz and
others called vivid attention to the Glacial period, which, as we shall
immediately see, affords a simple explanation of these facts. We have
evidence of almost every conceivable kind, organic and inorganic, that,
within a very recent geological period, central Europe and North
America suffered under an Arctic climate. The ruins of a house burnt by
fire do not tell their tale more plainly than do the mountains of
Scotland and Wales, with their scored flanks, polished surfaces, and
perched boulders, of the icy streams with which their valleys were
lately filled. So greatly has the climate of Europe changed, that in
Northern Italy, gigantic moraines, left by old glaciers, are now
clothed by the vine and maize. Throughout a large part of the United
States, erratic boulders and scored rocks plainly reveal a former cold
period.

The former influence of the glacial climate on the distribution of the
inhabitants of Europe, as explained by Edward Forbes, is substantially
as follows. But we shall follow the changes more readily, by supposing
a new glacial period slowly to come on, and then pass away, as formerly
occurred. As the cold came on, and as each more southern zone became
fitted for the inhabitants of the north, these would take the places of
the former inhabitants of the temperate regions. The latter, at the
same time would travel further and further southward, unless they were
stopped by barriers, in which case they would perish. The mountains
would become covered with snow and ice, and their former Alpine
inhabitants would descend to the plains. By the time that the cold had
reached its maximum, we should have an arctic fauna and flora, covering
the central parts of Europe, as far south as the Alps and Pyrenees, and
even stretching into Spain. The now temperate regions of the United
States would likewise be covered by arctic plants and animals and these
would be nearly the same with those of Europe; for the present
circumpolar inhabitants, which we suppose to have everywhere travelled
southward, are remarkably uniform round the world.

As the warmth returned, the arctic forms would retreat northward,
closely followed up in their retreat by the productions of the more
temperate regions. And as the snow melted from the bases of the
mountains, the arctic forms would seize on the cleared and thawed
ground, always ascending, as the warmth increased and the snow still
further disappeared, higher and higher, whilst their brethren were
pursuing their northern journey. Hence, when the warmth had fully
returned, the same species, which had lately lived together on the
European and North American lowlands, would again be found in the
arctic regions of the Old and New Worlds, and on many isolated
mountain-summits far distant from each other.

Thus we can understand the identity of many plants at points so
immensely remote as the mountains of the United States and those of
Europe. We can thus also understand the fact that the Alpine plants of
each mountain-range are more especially related to the arctic forms
living due north or nearly due north of them: for the first migration
when the cold came on, and the re-migration on the returning warmth,
would generally have been due south and north. The Alpine plants, for
example, of Scotland, as remarked by Mr. H.C. Watson, and those of the
Pyrenees, as remarked by Ramond, are more especially allied to the
plants of northern Scandinavia; those of the United States to Labrador;
those of the mountains of Siberia to the arctic regions of that
country. These views, grounded as they are on the perfectly
well-ascertained occurrence of a former Glacial period, seem to me to
explain in so satisfactory a manner the present distribution of the
Alpine and Arctic productions of Europe and America, that when in other
regions we find the same species on distant mountain-summits, we may
almost conclude, without other evidence, that a colder climate formerly
permitted their migration across the intervening lowlands, now become
too warm for their existence.

As the arctic forms moved first southward and afterwards backward to
the north, in unison with the changing climate, they will not have been
exposed during their long migrations to any great diversity of
temperature; and as they all migrated in a body together, their mutual
relations will not have been much disturbed. Hence, in accordance with
the principles inculcated in this volume, these forms will not have
been liable to much modification. But with the Alpine productions, left
isolated from the moment of the returning warmth, first at the bases
and ultimately on the summits of the mountains, the case will have been
somewhat different; for it is not likely that all the same arctic
species will have been left on mountain ranges far distant from each
other, and have survived there ever since; they will also, in all
probability, have become mingled with ancient Alpine species, which
must have existed on the mountains before the commencement of the
Glacial epoch, and which during the coldest period will have been
temporarily driven down to the plains; they will, also, have been
subsequently exposed to somewhat different climatical influences. Their
mutual relations will thus have been in some degree disturbed;
consequently they will have been liable to modification; and they have
been modified; for if we compare the present Alpine plants and animals
of the several great European mountain ranges, one with another, though
many of the species remain identically the same, some exist as
varieties, some as doubtful forms or sub-species and some as distinct
yet closely allied species representing each other on the several
ranges.

In the foregoing illustration, I have assumed that at the commencement
of our imaginary Glacial period, the arctic productions were as uniform
round the polar regions as they are at the present day. But it is also
necessary to assume that many sub-arctic and some few temperate forms
were the same round the world, for some of the species which now exist
on the lower mountain slopes and on the plains of North America and
Europe are the same; and it may be asked how I account for this degree
of uniformity of the sub-arctic and temperate forms round the world, at
the commencement of the real Glacial period. At the present day, the
sub-arctic and northern temperate productions of the Old and New Worlds
are separated from each other by the whole Atlantic Ocean and by the
northern part of the Pacific. During the Glacial period, when the
inhabitants of the Old and New Worlds lived further southwards than
they do at present, they must have been still more completely separated
from each other by wider spaces of ocean; so that it may well be asked
how the same species could then or previously have entered the two
continents. The explanation, I believe, lies in the nature of the
climate before the commencement of the Glacial period. At this, the
newer Pliocene period, the majority of the inhabitants of the world
were specifically the same as now, and we have good reason to believe
that the climate was warmer than at the present day. Hence, we may
suppose that the organisms which now live under latitude 60°, lived
during the Pliocene period further north, under the Polar Circle, in
latitude 66°–67°; and that the present arctic productions then lived on
the broken land still nearer to the pole. Now, if we look at a
terrestrial globe, we see under the Polar Circle that there is almost
continuous land from western Europe through Siberia, to eastern
America. And this continuity of the circumpolar land, with the
consequent freedom under a more favourable climate for intermigration,
will account for the supposed uniformity of the sub-arctic and
temperate productions of the Old and New Worlds, at a period anterior
to the Glacial epoch.

Believing, from reasons before alluded to, that our continents have
long remained in nearly the same relative position, though subjected to
great oscillations of level, I am strongly inclined to extend the above
view, and to infer that during some earlier and still warmer period,
such as the older Pliocene period, a large number of the same plants
and animals inhabited the almost continuous circumpolar land; and that
these plants and animals, both in the Old and New Worlds, began slowly
to migrate southwards as the climate became less warm, long before the
commencement of the Glacial period. We now see, as I believe, their
descendants, mostly in a modified condition, in the central parts of
Europe and the United States. On this view we can understand the
relationship with very little identity, between the productions of
North America and Europe—a relationship which is highly remarkable,
considering the distance of the two areas, and their separation by the
whole Atlantic Ocean. We can further understand the singular fact
remarked on by several observers that the productions of Europe and
America during the later tertiary stages were more closely related to
each other than they are at the present time; for during these warmer
periods the northern parts of the Old and New Worlds will have been
almost continuously united by land, serving as a bridge, since rendered
impassable by cold, for the intermigration of their inhabitants.

During the slowly decreasing warmth of the Pliocene period, as soon as
the species in common, which inhabited the New and Old Worlds, migrated
south of the Polar Circle, they will have been completely cut off from
each other. This separation, as far as the more temperate productions
are concerned, must have taken place long ages ago. As the plants and
animals migrated southward, they will have become mingled in the one
great region with the native American productions, and would have had
to compete with them; and in the other great region, with those of the
Old World. Consequently we have here everything favourable for much
modification—for far more modification than with the Alpine
productions, left isolated, within a much more recent period, on the
several mountain ranges and on the arctic lands of Europe and North
America. Hence, it has come, that when we compare the now living
productions of the temperate regions of the New and Old Worlds, we find
very few identical species (though Asa Gray has lately shown that more
plants are identical than was formerly supposed), but we find in every
great class many forms, which some naturalists rank as geographical
races, and others as distinct species; and a host of closely allied or
representative forms which are ranked by all naturalists as
specifically distinct.

As on the land, so in the waters of the sea, a slow southern migration
of a marine fauna, which, during the Pliocene or even a somewhat
earlier period, was nearly uniform along the continuous shores of the
Polar Circle, will account, on the theory of modification, for many
closely allied forms now living in marine areas completely sundered.
Thus, I think, we can understand the presence of some closely allied,
still existing and extinct tertiary forms, on the eastern and western
shores of temperate North America; and the still more striking fact of
many closely allied crustaceans (as described in Dana’s admirable
work), some fish and other marine animals, inhabiting the Mediterranean
and the seas of Japan—these two areas being now completely separated by
the breadth of a whole continent and by wide spaces of ocean.

These cases of close relationship in species either now or formerly
inhabiting the seas on the eastern and western shores of North America,
the Mediterranean and Japan, and the temperate lands of North America
and Europe, are inexplicable on the theory of creation. We cannot
maintain that such species have been created alike, in correspondence
with the nearly similar physical conditions of the areas; for if we
compare, for instance, certain parts of South America with parts of
South Africa or Australia, we see countries closely similar in all
their physical conditions, with their inhabitants utterly dissimilar.

_Alternate Glacial Periods in the North and South._

But we must return to our more immediate subject. I am convinced that
Forbes’s view may be largely extended. In Europe we meet with the
plainest evidence of the Glacial period, from the western shores of
Britain to the Ural range, and southward to the Pyrenees. We may infer
from the frozen mammals and nature of the mountain vegetation, that
Siberia was similarly affected. In the Lebanon, according to Dr.
Hooker, perpetual snow formerly covered the central axis, and fed
glaciers which rolled 4,000 feet down the valleys. The same observer
has recently found great moraines at a low level on the Atlas range in
North Africa. Along the Himalaya, at points 900 miles apart, glaciers
have left the marks of their former low descent; and in Sikkim, Dr.
Hooker saw maize growing on ancient and gigantic moraines. Southward of
the Asiatic continent, on the opposite side of the equator, we know,
from the excellent researches of Dr. J. Haast and Dr. Hector, that in
New Zealand immense glaciers formerly descended to a low level; and the
same plants, found by Dr. Hooker on widely separated mountains in this
island tell the same story of a former cold period. From facts
communicated to me by the Rev. W.B. Clarke, it appears also that there
are traces of former glacial action on the mountains of the
south-eastern corner of Australia.

Looking to America: in the northern half, ice-borne fragments of rock
have been observed on the eastern side of the continent, as far south
as latitude 36° and 37°, and on the shores of the Pacific, where the
climate is now so different, as far south as latitude 46°. Erratic
boulders have, also, been noticed on the Rocky Mountains. In the
Cordillera of South America, nearly under the equator, glaciers once
extended far below their present level. In central Chile I examined a
vast mound of detritus with great boulders, crossing the Portillo
valley, which, there can hardly be a doubt, once formed a huge moraine;
and Mr. D. Forbes informs me that he found in various parts of the
Cordillera, from latitude 13° to 30° south, at about the height of
12,000 feet, deeply-furrowed rocks, resembling those with which he was
familiar in Norway, and likewise great masses of detritus, including
grooved pebbles. Along this whole space of the Cordillera true glaciers
do not now exist even at much more considerable heights. Further south,
on both sides of the continent, from latitude 41° to the southernmost
extremity, we have the clearest evidence of former glacial action, in
numerous immense boulders transported far from their parent source.

From these several facts, namely, from the glacial action having
extended all round the northern and southern hemispheres—from the
period having been in a geological sense recent in both
hemispheres—from its having lasted in both during a great length of
time, as may be inferred from the amount of work effected—and lastly,
from glaciers having recently descended to a low level along the whole
line of the Cordillera, it at one time appeared to me that we could not
avoid the conclusion that the temperature of the whole world had been
simultaneously lowered during the Glacial period. But now, Mr. Croll,
in a series of admirable memoirs, has attempted to show that a glacial
condition of climate is the result of various physical causes, brought
into operation by an increase in the eccentricity of the earth’s orbit.
All these causes tend towards the same end; but the most powerful
appears to be the indirect influence of the eccentricity of the orbit
upon oceanic currents. According to Mr. Croll, cold periods regularly
recur every ten or fifteen thousand years; and these at long intervals
are extremely severe, owing to certain contingencies, of which the most
important, as Sir C. Lyell has shown, is the relative position of the
land and water. Mr. Croll believes that the last great glacial period
occurred about 240,000 years ago, and endured, with slight alterations
of climate, for about 160,000 years. With respect to more ancient
glacial periods, several geologists are convinced, from direct
evidence, that such occurred during the miocene and eocene formations,
not to mention still more ancient formations. But the most important
result for us, arrived at by Mr. Croll, is that whenever the northern
hemisphere passes through a cold period the temperature of the southern
hemisphere is actually raised, with the winters rendered much milder,
chiefly through changes in the direction of the ocean currents. So
conversely it will be with the northern hemisphere, while the southern
passes through a glacial period. This conclusion throws so much light
on geographical distribution that I am strongly inclined to trust in
it; but I will first give the facts which demand an explanation.

In South America, Dr. Hooker has shown that besides many closely allied
species, between forty and fifty of the flowering plants of Tierra del
Fuego, forming no inconsiderable part of its scanty flora, are common
to North America and Europe, enormously remote as these areas in
opposite hemispheres are from each other. On the lofty mountains of
equatorial America a host of peculiar species belonging to European
genera occur. On the Organ Mountains of Brazil some few temperate
European, some Antarctic and some Andean genera were found by Gardner
which do not exist in the low intervening hot countries. On the Silla
of Caraccas the illustrious Humboldt long ago found species belonging
to genera characteristic of the Cordillera.

In Africa, several forms characteristic of Europe, and some few
representatives of the flora of the Cape of Good Hope, occur on the
mountains of Abyssinia. At the Cape of Good Hope a very few European
species, believed not to have been introduced by man, and on the
mountains several representative European forms are found which have
not been discovered in the intertropical parts of Africa. Dr. Hooker
has also lately shown that several of the plants living on the upper
parts of the lofty island of Fernando Po, and on the neighbouring
Cameroon Mountains, in the Gulf of Guinea, are closely related to those
on the mountains of Abyssinia, and likewise to those of temperate
Europe. It now also appears, as I hear from Dr. Hooker, that some of
these same temperate plants have been discovered by the Rev. R.T. Lowe
on the mountains of the Cape Verde Islands. This extension of the same
temperate forms, almost under the equator, across the whole continent
of Africa and to the mountains of the Cape Verde archipelago, is one of
the most astonishing facts ever recorded in the distribution of plants.

On the Himalaya, and on the isolated mountain ranges of the peninsula
of India, on the heights of Ceylon, and on the volcanic cones of Java,
many plants occur either identically the same or representing each
other, and at the same time representing plants of Europe not found in
the intervening hot lowlands. A list of the genera of plants collected
on the loftier peaks of Java, raises a picture of a collection made on
a hillock in Europe. Still more striking is the fact that peculiar
Australian forms are represented by certain plants growing on the
summits of the mountains of Borneo. Some of these Australian forms, as
I hear from Dr. Hooker, extend along the heights of the peninsula of
Malacca, and are thinly scattered on the one hand over India, and on
the other hand as far north as Japan.

On the southern mountains of Australia, Dr. F. Müller has discovered
several European species; other species, not introduced by man, occur
on the lowlands; and a long list can be given, as I am informed by Dr.
Hooker, of European genera, found in Australia, but not in the
intermediate torrid regions. In the admirable “Introduction to the
Flora of New Zealand,” by Dr. Hooker, analogous and striking facts are
given in regard to the plants of that large island. Hence, we see that
certain plants growing on the more lofty mountains of the tropics in
all parts of the world, and on the temperate plains of the north and
south, are either the same species or varieties of the same species. It
should, however, be observed that these plants are not strictly arctic
forms; for, as Mr. H.C. Watson has remarked, “in receding from polar
toward equatorial latitudes, the Alpine or mountain flora really become
less and less Arctic.” Besides these identical and closely allied
forms, many species inhabiting the same widely sundered areas, belong
to genera not now found in the intermediate tropical lowlands.

These brief remarks apply to plants alone; but some few analogous facts
could be given in regard to terrestrial animals. In marine productions,
similar cases likewise occur; as an example, I may quote a statement by
the highest authority, Prof. Dana, that “it is certainly a wonderful
fact that New Zealand should have a closer resemblance in its crustacea
to Great Britain, its antipode, than to any other part of the world.”
Sir J. Richardson, also, speaks of the reappearance on the shores of
New Zealand, Tasmania, &c., of northern forms of fish. Dr. Hooker
informs me that twenty-five species of Algæ are common to New Zealand
and to Europe, but have not been found in the intermediate tropical
seas.

From the foregoing facts, namely, the presence of temperate forms on
the highlands across the whole of equatorial Africa, and along the
Peninsula of India, to Ceylon and the Malay Archipelago, and in a less
well-marked manner across the wide expanse of tropical South America,
it appears almost certain that at some former period, no doubt during
the most severe part of a Glacial period, the lowlands of these great
continents were everywhere tenanted under the equator by a considerable
number of temperate forms. At this period the equatorial climate at the
level of the sea was probably about the same with that now experienced
at the height of from five to six thousand feet under the same
latitude, or perhaps even rather cooler. During this, the coldest
period, the lowlands under the equator must have been clothed with a
mingled tropical and temperate vegetation, like that described by
Hooker as growing luxuriantly at the height of from four to five
thousand feet on the lower slopes of the Himalaya, but with perhaps a
still greater preponderance of temperate forms. So again in the
mountainous island of Fernando Po, in the Gulf of Guinea, Mr. Mann
found temperate European forms beginning to appear at the height of
about five thousand feet. On the mountains of Panama, at the height of
only two thousand feet, Dr. Seemann found the vegetation like that of
Mexico, “with forms of the torrid zone harmoniously blended with those
of the temperate.”

Now let us see whether Mr. Croll’s conclusion that when the northern
hemisphere suffered from the extreme cold of the great Glacial period,
the southern hemisphere was actually warmer, throws any clear light on
the present apparently inexplicable distribution of various organisms
in the temperate parts of both hemispheres, and on the mountains of the
tropics. The Glacial period, as measured by years, must have been very
long; and when we remember over what vast spaces some naturalised
plants and animals have spread within a few centuries, this period will
have been ample for any amount of migration. As the cold became more
and more intense, we know that Arctic forms invaded the temperate
regions; and from the facts just given, there can hardly be a doubt
that some of the more vigorous, dominant and widest-spreading temperate
forms invaded the equatorial lowlands. The inhabitants of these hot
lowlands would at the same time have migrated to the tropical and
subtropical regions of the south, for the southern hemisphere was at
this period warmer. On the decline of the Glacial period, as both
hemispheres gradually recovered their former temperature, the northern
temperate forms living on the lowlands under the equator, would have
been driven to their former homes or have been destroyed, being
replaced by the equatorial forms returning from the south. Some,
however, of the northern temperate forms would almost certainly have
ascended any adjoining high land, where, if sufficiently lofty, they
would have long survived like the Arctic forms on the mountains of
Europe. They might have survived, even if the climate was not perfectly
fitted for them, for the change of temperature must have been very
slow, and plants undoubtedly possess a certain capacity for
acclimatisation, as shown by their transmitting to their offspring
different constitutional powers of resisting heat and cold.

In the regular course of events the southern hemisphere would in its
turn be subjected to a severe Glacial period, with the northern
hemisphere rendered warmer; and then the southern temperate forms would
invade the equatorial lowlands. The northern forms which had before
been left on the mountains would now descend and mingle with the
southern forms. These latter, when the warmth returned, would return to
their former homes, leaving some few species on the mountains, and
carrying southward with them some of the northern temperate forms which
had descended from their mountain fastnesses. Thus, we should have some
few species identically the same in the northern and southern temperate
zones and on the mountains of the intermediate tropical regions. But
the species left during a long time on these mountains, or in opposite
hemispheres, would have to compete with many new forms and would be
exposed to somewhat different physical conditions; hence, they would be
eminently liable to modification, and would generally now exist as
varieties or as representative species; and this is the case. We must,
also, bear in mind the occurrence in both hemispheres of former Glacial
periods; for these will account, in accordance with the same
principles, for the many quite distinct species inhabiting the same
widely separated areas, and belonging to genera not now found in the
intermediate torrid zones.

It is a remarkable fact, strongly insisted on by Hooker in regard to
America, and by Alph. de Candolle in regard to Australia, that many
more identical or slightly modified species have migrated from the
north to the south, than in a reversed direction. We see, however, a
few southern forms on the mountains of Borneo and Abyssinia. I suspect
that this preponderant migration from the north to the south is due to
the greater extent of land in the north, and to the northern forms
having existed in their own homes in greater numbers, and having
consequently been advanced through natural selection and competition to
a higher stage of perfection, or dominating power, than the southern
forms. And thus, when the two sets became commingled in the equatorial
regions, during the alternations of the Glacial periods, the northern
forms were the more powerful and were able to hold their places on the
mountains, and afterwards migrate southward with the southern forms;
but not so the southern in regard to the northern forms. In the same
manner, at the present day, we see that very many European productions
cover the ground in La Plata, New Zealand, and to a lesser degree in
Australia, and have beaten the natives; whereas extremely few southern
forms have become naturalised in any part of the northern hemisphere,
though hides, wool, and other objects likely to carry seeds have been
largely imported into Europe during the last two or three centuries
from La Plata and during the last forty or fifty years from Australia.
The Neilgherrie Mountains in India, however, offer a partial exception;
for here, as I hear from Dr. Hooker, Australian forms are rapidly
sowing themselves and becoming naturalised. Before the last great
Glacial period, no doubt the intertropical mountains were stocked with
endemic Alpine forms; but these have almost everywhere yielded to the
more dominant forms generated in the larger areas and more efficient
workshops of the north. In many islands the native productions are
nearly equalled, or even outnumbered, by those which have become
naturalised; and this is the first stage towards their extinction.
Mountains are islands on the land; and their inhabitants have yielded
to those produced within the larger areas of the north, just in the
same way as the inhabitants of real islands have everywhere yielded and
are still yielding to continental forms naturalised through man’s
agency.

The same principles apply to the distribution of terrestrial animals
and of marine productions, in the northern and southern temperate
zones, and on the intertropical mountains. When, during the height of
the Glacial period, the ocean-currents were widely different to what
they now are, some of the inhabitants of the temperate seas might have
reached the equator; of these a few would perhaps at once be able to
migrate southwards, by keeping to the cooler currents, while others
might remain and survive in the colder depths until the southern
hemisphere was in its turn subjected to a glacial climate and permitted
their further progress; in nearly the same manner as, according to
Forbes, isolated spaces inhabited by Arctic productions exist to the
present day in the deeper parts of the northern temperate seas.

I am far from supposing that all the difficulties in regard to the
distribution and affinities of the identical and allied species, which
now live so widely separated in the north and south, and sometimes on
the intermediate mountain ranges, are removed on the views above given.
The exact lines of migration cannot be indicated. We cannot say why
certain species and not others have migrated; why certain species have
been modified and have given rise to new forms, while others have
remained unaltered. We cannot hope to explain such facts, until we can
say why one species and not another becomes naturalised by man’s agency
in a foreign land; why one species ranges twice or thrice as far, and
is twice or thrice as common, as another species within their own
homes.

Various special difficulties also remain to be solved; for instance,
the occurrence, as shown by Dr. Hooker, of the same plants at points so
enormously remote as Kerguelen Land, New Zealand, and Fuegia; but
icebergs, as suggested by Lyell, may have been concerned in their
dispersal. The existence at these and other distant points of the
southern hemisphere, of species, which, though distinct, belong to
genera exclusively confined to the south, is a more remarkable case.
Some of these species are so distinct, that we cannot suppose that
there has been time since the commencement of the last Glacial period
for their migration and subsequent modification to the necessary
degree. The facts seem to indicate that distinct species belonging to
the same genera have migrated in radiating lines from a common centre;
and I am inclined to look in the southern, as in the northern
hemisphere, to a former and warmer period, before the commencement of
the last Glacial period, when the Antarctic lands, now covered with
ice, supported a highly peculiar and isolated flora. It may be
suspected that before this flora was exterminated during the last
Glacial epoch, a few forms had been already widely dispersed to various
points of the southern hemisphere by occasional means of transport, and
by the aid, as halting-places, of now sunken islands. Thus the southern
shores of America, Australia, and New Zealand may have become slightly
tinted by the same peculiar forms of life.

Sir C. Lyell in a striking passage has speculated, in language almost
identical with mine, on the effects of great alternations of climate
throughout the world on geographical distribution. And we have now seen
that Mr. Croll’s conclusion that successive Glacial periods in the one
hemisphere coincide with warmer periods in the opposite hemisphere,
together with the admission of the slow modification of species,
explains a multitude of facts in the distribution of the same and of
the allied forms of life in all parts of the globe. The living waters
have flowed during one period from the north and during another from
the south, and in both cases have reached the equator; but the stream
of life has flowed with greater force from the north than in the
opposite direction, and has consequently more freely inundated the
south. As the tide leaves its drift in horizontal lines, rising higher
on the shores where the tide rises highest, so have the living waters
left their living drift on our mountain summits, in a line gently
rising from the Arctic lowlands to a great latitude under the equator.
The various beings thus left stranded may be compared with savage races
of man, driven up and surviving in the mountain fastnesses of almost
every land, which serves as a record, full of interest to us, of the
former inhabitants of the surrounding lowlands.

CHAPTER XIII.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION—_continued_.

Distribution of fresh-water productions—On the inhabitants of oceanic
islands—Absence of Batrachians and of terrestrial Mammals—On the
relation of the inhabitants of islands to those of the nearest
mainland—On colonisation from the nearest source with subsequent
modification—Summary of the last and present chapters.

_Fresh-water Productions._

As lakes and river-systems are separated from each other by barriers of
land, it might have been thought that fresh-water productions would not
have ranged widely within the same country, and as the sea is
apparently a still more formidable barrier, that they would never have
extended to distant countries. But the case is exactly the reverse. Not
only have many fresh-water species, belonging to different classes, an
enormous range, but allied species prevail in a remarkable manner
throughout the world. When first collecting in the fresh waters of
Brazil, I well remember feeling much surprise at the similarity of the
fresh-water insects, shells, &c., and at the dissimilarity of the
surrounding terrestrial beings, compared with those of Britain.

But the wide ranging power of fresh-water productions can, I think, in
most cases be explained by their having become fitted, in a manner
highly useful to them, for short and frequent migrations from pond to
pond, or from stream to stream, within their own countries; and
liability to wide dispersal would follow from this capacity as an
almost necessary consequence. We can here consider only a few cases; of
these, some of the most difficult to explain are presented by fish. It
was formerly believed that the same fresh-water species never existed
on two continents distant from each other. But Dr. Günther has lately
shown that the Galaxias attenuatus inhabits Tasmania, New Zealand, the
Falkland Islands and the mainland of South America. This is a wonderful
case, and probably indicates dispersal from an Antarctic centre during
a former warm period. This case, however, is rendered in some degree
less surprising by the species of this genus having the power of
crossing by some unknown means considerable spaces of open ocean: thus
there is one species common to New Zealand and to the Auckland Islands,
though separated by a distance of about 230 miles. On the same
continent fresh-water fish often range widely, and as if capriciously;
for in two adjoining river systems some of the species may be the same
and some wholly different.

It is probable that they are occasionally transported by what may be
called accidental means. Thus fishes still alive are not very rarely
dropped at distant points by whirlwinds; and it is known that the ova
retain their vitality for a considerable time after removal from the
water. Their dispersal may, however, be mainly attributed to changes in
the level of the land within the recent period, causing rivers to flow
into each other. Instances, also, could be given of this having
occurred during floods, without any change of level. The wide
differences of the fish on the opposite sides of most mountain-ranges,
which are continuous and consequently must, from an early period, have
completely prevented the inosculation of the river systems on the two
sides, leads to the same conclusion. Some fresh-water fish belong to
very ancient forms, and in such cases there will have been ample time
for great geographical changes, and consequently time and means for
much migration. Moreover, Dr. Günther has recently been led by several
considerations to infer that with fishes the same forms have a long
endurance. Salt-water fish can with care be slowly accustomed to live
in fresh water; and, according to Valenciennes, there is hardly a
single group of which all the members are confined to fresh water, so
that a marine species belonging to a fresh-water group might travel far
along the shores of the sea, and could, it is probable, become adapted
without much difficulty to the fresh waters of a distant land.

Some species of fresh-water shells have very wide ranges, and allied
species which, on our theory, are descended from a common parent, and
must have proceeded from a single source, prevail throughout the world.
Their distribution at first perplexed me much, as their ova are not
likely to be transported by birds; and the ova, as well as the adults,
are immediately killed by sea-water. I could not even understand how
some naturalised species have spread rapidly throughout the same
country. But two facts, which I have observed—and many others no doubt
will be discovered—throw some light on this subject. When ducks
suddenly emerge from a pond covered with duck-weed, I have twice seen
these little plants adhering to their backs; and it has happened to me,
in removing a little duck-weed from one aquarium to another, that I
have unintentionally stocked the one with fresh-water shells from the
other. But another agency is perhaps more effectual: I suspended the
feet of a duck in an aquarium, where many ova of fresh-water shells
were hatching; and I found that numbers of the extremely minute and
just-hatched shells crawled on the feet, and clung to them so firmly
that when taken out of the water they could not be jarred off, though
at a somewhat more advanced age they would voluntarily drop off. These
just-hatched molluscs, though aquatic in their nature, survived on the
duck’s feet, in damp air, from twelve to twenty hours; and in this
length of time a duck or heron might fly at least six or seven hundred
miles, and if blown across the sea to an oceanic island, or to any
other distant point, would be sure to alight on a pool or rivulet. Sir
Charles Lyell informs me that a Dyticus has been caught with an Ancylus
(a fresh-water shell like a limpet) firmly adhering to it; and a
water-beetle of the same family, a Colymbetes, once flew on board the
“Beagle,” when forty-five miles distant from the nearest land: how much
farther it might have been blown by a favouring gale no one can tell.

With respect to plants, it has long been known what enormous ranges
many fresh-water, and even marsh-species, have, both over continents
and to the most remote oceanic islands. This is strikingly illustrated,
according to Alph. de Candolle, in those large groups of terrestrial
plants, which have very few aquatic members; for the latter seem
immediately to acquire, as if in consequence, a wide range. I think
favourable means of dispersal explain this fact. I have before
mentioned that earth occasionally adheres in some quantity to the feet
and beaks of birds. Wading birds, which frequent the muddy edges of
ponds, if suddenly flushed, would be the most likely to have muddy
feet. Birds of this order wander more than those of any other; and are
occasionally found on the most remote and barren islands of the open
ocean; they would not be likely to alight on the surface of the sea, so
that any dirt on their feet would not be washed off; and when gaining
the land, they would be sure to fly to their natural fresh-water
haunts. I do not believe that botanists are aware how charged the mud
of ponds is with seeds: I have tried several little experiments, but
will here give only the most striking case: I took in February three
tablespoonfuls of mud from three different points, beneath water, on
the edge of a little pond; this mud when dry weighed only 6 and 3/4
ounces; I kept it covered up in my study for six months, pulling up and
counting each plant as it grew; the plants were of many kinds, and were
altogether 537 in number; and yet the viscid mud was all contained in a
breakfast cup! Considering these facts, I think it would be an
inexplicable circumstance if water-birds did not transport the seeds of
fresh-water plants to unstocked ponds and streams, situated at very
distant points. The same agency may have come into play with the eggs
of some of the smaller fresh-water animals.

Other and unknown agencies probably have also played a part. I have
stated that fresh-water fish eat some kinds of seeds, though they
reject many other kinds after having swallowed them; even small fish
swallow seeds of moderate size, as of the yellow water-lily and
Potamogeton. Herons and other birds, century after century, have gone
on daily devouring fish; they then take flight and go to other waters,
or are blown across the sea; and we have seen that seeds retain their
power of germination, when rejected many hours afterwards in pellets or
in the excrement. When I saw the great size of the seeds of that fine
water-lily, the Nelumbium, and remembered Alph. de Candolle’s remarks
on the distribution of this plant, I thought that the means of its
dispersal must remain inexplicable; but Audubon states that he found
the seeds of the great southern water-lily (probably according to Dr.
Hooker, the Nelumbium luteum) in a heron’s stomach. Now this bird must
often have flown with its stomach thus well stocked to distant ponds,
and, then getting a hearty meal of fish, analogy makes me believe that
it would have rejected the seeds in the pellet in a fit state for
germination.

In considering these several means of distribution, it should be
remembered that when a pond or stream is first formed, for instance on
a rising islet, it will be unoccupied; and a single seed or egg will
have a good chance of succeeding. Although there will always be a
struggle for life between the inhabitants of the same pond, however few
in kind, yet as the number even in a well-stocked pond is small in
comparison with the number of species inhabiting an equal area of land,
the competition between them will probably be less severe than between
terrestrial species; consequently an intruder from the waters of a
foreign country would have a better chance of seizing on a new place,
than in the case of terrestrial colonists. We should also remember that
many fresh-water productions are low in the scale of nature, and we
have reason to believe that such beings become modified more slowly
than the high; and this will give time for the migration of aquatic
species. We should not forget the probability of many fresh-water forms
having formerly ranged continuously over immense areas, and then having
become extinct at intermediate points. But the wide distribution of
fresh-water plants, and of the lower animals, whether retaining the
same identical form, or in some degree modified, apparently depends in
main part on the wide dispersal of their seeds and eggs by animals,
more especially by fresh-water birds, which have great powers of
flight, and naturally travel from one piece of water to another.

_On the Inhabitants of Oceanic Islands._

We now come to the last of the three classes of facts, which I have
selected as presenting the greatest amount of difficulty with respect
to distribution, on the view that not only all the individuals of the
same species have migrated from some one area, but that allied species,
although now inhabiting the most distant points, have proceeded from a
single area, the birthplace of their early progenitors. I have already
given my reasons for disbelieving in continental extensions within the
period of existing species on so enormous a scale that all the many
islands of the several oceans were thus stocked with their present
terrestrial inhabitants. This view removes many difficulties, but it
does not accord with all the facts in regard to the productions of
islands. In the following remarks I shall not confine myself to the
mere question of dispersal, but shall consider some other cases bearing
on the truth of the two theories of independent creation and of descent
with modification.

The species of all kinds which inhabit oceanic islands are few in
number compared with those on equal continental areas: Alph. de
Candolle admits this for plants, and Wollaston for insects. New
Zealand, for instance, with its lofty mountains and diversified
stations, extending over 780 miles of latitude, together with the
outlying islands of Auckland, Campbell and Chatham, contain altogether
only 960 kinds of flowering plants; if we compare this moderate number
with the species which swarm over equal areas in Southwestern Australia
or at the Cape of Good Hope, we must admit that some cause,
independently of different physical conditions, has given rise to so
great a difference in number. Even the uniform county of Cambridge has
847 plants, and the little island of Anglesea 764, but a few ferns and
a few introduced plants are included in these numbers, and the
comparison in some other respects is not quite fair. We have evidence
that the barren island of Ascension aboriginally possessed less than
half-a-dozen flowering plants; yet many species have now become
naturalised on it, as they have in New Zealand and on every other
oceanic island which can be named. In St. Helena there is reason to
believe that the naturalised plants and animals have nearly or quite
exterminated many native productions. He who admits the doctrine of the
creation of each separate species, will have to admit that a sufficient
number of the best adapted plants and animals were not created for
oceanic islands; for man has unintentionally stocked them far more
fully and perfectly than did nature.

Although in oceanic islands the species are few in number, the
proportion of endemic kinds (_i.e._ those found nowhere else in the
world) is often extremely large. If we compare, for instance, the
number of endemic land-shells in Madeira, or of endemic birds in the
Galapagos Archipelago, with the number found on any continent, and then
compare the area of the island with that of the continent, we shall see
that this is true. This fact might have been theoretically expected,
for, as already explained, species occasionally arriving, after long
intervals of time in the new and isolated district, and having to
compete with new associates, would be eminently liable to modification,
and would often produce groups of modified descendants. But it by no
means follows that, because in an island nearly all the species of one
class are peculiar, those of another class, or of another section of
the same class, are peculiar; and this difference seems to depend
partly on the species which are not modified having immigrated in a
body, so that their mutual relations have not been much disturbed; and
partly on the frequent arrival of unmodified immigrants from the
mother-country, with which the insular forms have intercrossed. It
should be borne in mind that the offspring of such crosses would
certainly gain in vigour; so that even an occasional cross would
produce more effect than might have been anticipated. I will give a few
illustrations of the foregoing remarks: in the Galapagos Islands there
are twenty-six land birds; of these twenty-one (or perhaps
twenty-three) are peculiar; whereas of the eleven marine birds only two
are peculiar; and it is obvious that marine birds could arrive at these
islands much more easily and frequently than land-birds. Bermuda, on
the other hand, which lies at about the same distance from North
America as the Galapagos Islands do from South America, and which has a
very peculiar soil, does not possess a single endemic land bird; and we
know from Mr. J.M. Jones’s admirable account of Bermuda, that very many
North American birds occasionally or even frequently visit this island.
Almost every year, as I am informed by Mr. E.V. Harcourt, many European
and African birds are blown to Madeira; this island is inhabited by
ninety-nine kinds, of which one alone is peculiar, though very closely
related to a European form; and three or four other species are
confined to this island and to the Canaries. So that the islands of
Bermuda and Madeira have been stocked from the neighbouring continents
with birds, which for long ages have there struggled together, and have
become mutually co-adapted. Hence, when settled in their new homes,
each kind will have been kept by the others to its proper place and
habits, and will consequently have been but little liable to
modification. Any tendency to modification will also have been checked
by intercrossing with the unmodified immigrants, often arriving from
the mother-country. Madeira again is inhabited by a wonderful number of
peculiar land-shells, whereas not one species of sea-shell is peculiar
to its shores: now, though we do not know how sea-shells are dispersed,
yet we can see that their eggs or larvæ, perhaps attached to seaweed or
floating timber, or to the feet of wading birds, might be transported
across three or four hundred miles of open sea far more easily than
land-shells. The different orders of insects inhabiting Madeira present
nearly parallel cases.

Oceanic islands are sometimes deficient in animals of certain whole
classes, and their places are occupied by other classes; thus in the
Galapagos Islands reptiles, and in New Zealand gigantic wingless birds,
take, or recently took, the place of mammals. Although New Zealand is
here spoken of as an oceanic island, it is in some degree doubtful
whether it should be so ranked; it is of large size, and is not
separated from Australia by a profoundly deep sea; from its geological
character and the direction of its mountain ranges, the Rev. W.B.
Clarke has lately maintained that this island, as well as New
Caledonia, should be considered as appurtenances of Australia. Turning
to plants, Dr. Hooker has shown that in the Galapagos Islands the
proportional numbers of the different orders are very different from
what they are elsewhere. All such differences in number, and the
absence of certain whole groups of animals and plants, are generally
accounted for by supposed differences in the physical conditions of the
islands; but this explanation is not a little doubtful. Facility of
immigration seems to have been fully as important as the nature of the
conditions.

Many remarkable little facts could be given with respect to the
inhabitants of oceanic islands. For instance, in certain islands not
tenanted by a single mammal, some of the endemic plants have
beautifully hooked seeds; yet few relations are more manifest than that
hooks serve for the transportal of seeds in the wool or fur of
quadrupeds. But a hooked seed might be carried to an island by other
means; and the plant then becoming modified would form an endemic
species, still retaining its hooks, which would form a useless
appendage, like the shrivelled wings under the soldered wing-covers of
many insular beetles. Again, islands often possess trees or bushes
belonging to orders which elsewhere include only herbaceous species;
now trees, as Alph. de Candolle has shown, generally have, whatever the
cause may be, confined ranges. Hence trees would be little likely to
reach distant oceanic islands; and an herbaceous plant, which had no
chance of successfully competing with the many fully developed trees
growing on a continent, might, when established on an island, gain an
advantage over other herbaceous plants by growing taller and taller and
overtopping them. In this case, natural selection would tend to add to
the stature of the plant, to whatever order it belonged, and thus first
convert it into a bush and then into a tree.

_Absence of Batrachians and Terrestrial mammals on Oceanic Islands._

With respect to the absence of whole orders of animals on oceanic
islands, Bory St. Vincent long ago remarked that Batrachians (frogs,
toads, newts) are never found on any of the many islands with which the
great oceans are studded. I have taken pains to verify this assertion,
and have found it true, with the exception of New Zealand, New
Caledonia, the Andaman Islands, and perhaps the Solomon Islands and the
Seychelles. But I have already remarked that it is doubtful whether New
Zealand and New Caledonia ought to be classed as oceanic islands; and
this is still more doubtful with respect to the Andaman and Solomon
groups and the Seychelles. This general absence of frogs, toads and
newts on so many true oceanic islands cannot be accounted for by their
physical conditions; indeed it seems that islands are peculiarly fitted
for these animals; for frogs have been introduced into Madeira, the
Azores, and Mauritius, and have multiplied so as to become a nuisance.
But as these animals and their spawn are immediately killed (with the
exception, as far as known, of one Indian species) by sea-water, there
would be great difficulty in their transportal across the sea, and
therefore we can see why they do not exist on strictly oceanic islands.
But why, on the theory of creation, they should not have been created
there, it would be very difficult to explain.

Mammals offer another and similar case. I have carefully searched the
oldest voyages, and have not found a single instance, free from doubt,
of a terrestrial mammal (excluding domesticated animals kept by the
natives) inhabiting an island situated above 300 miles from a continent
or great continental island; and many islands situated at a much less
distance are equally barren. The Falkland Islands, which are inhabited
by a wolf-like fox, come nearest to an exception; but this group cannot
be considered as oceanic, as it lies on a bank in connection with the
mainland at a distance of about 280 miles; moreover, icebergs formerly
brought boulders to its western shores, and they may have formerly
transported foxes, as now frequently happens in the arctic regions. Yet
it cannot be said that small islands will not support at least small
mammals, for they occur in many parts of the world on very small
islands, when lying close to a continent; and hardly an island can be
named on which our smaller quadrupeds have not become naturalised and
greatly multiplied. It cannot be said, on the ordinary view of
creation, that there has not been time for the creation of mammals;
many volcanic islands are sufficiently ancient, as shown by the
stupendous degradation which they have suffered, and by their tertiary
strata: there has also been time for the production of endemic species
belonging to other classes; and on continents it is known that new
species of mammals appear and disappear at a quicker rate than other
and lower animals. Although terrestrial mammals do not occur on oceanic
islands, aërial mammals do occur on almost every island. New Zealand
possesses two bats found nowhere else in the world: Norfolk Island, the
Viti Archipelago, the Bonin Islands, the Caroline and Marianne
Archipelagoes, and Mauritius, all possess their peculiar bats. Why, it
may be asked, has the supposed creative force produced bats and no
other mammals on remote islands? On my view this question can easily be
answered; for no terrestrial mammal can be transported across a wide
space of sea, but bats can fly across. Bats have been seen wandering by
day far over the Atlantic Ocean; and two North American species, either
regularly or occasionally, visit Bermuda, at the distance of 600 miles
from the mainland. I hear from Mr. Tomes, who has specially studied
this family, that many species have enormous ranges, and are found on
continents and on far distant islands. Hence, we have only to suppose
that such wandering species have been modified in their new homes in
relation to their new position, and we can understand the presence of
endemic bats on oceanic islands, with the absence of all other
terrestrial mammals.

Another interesting relation exists, namely, between the depth of the
sea separating islands from each other, or from the nearest continent,
and the degree of affinity of their mammalian inhabitants. Mr. Windsor
Earl has made some striking observations on this head, since greatly
extended by Mr. Wallace’s admirable researches, in regard to the great
Malay Archipelago, which is traversed near Celebes by a space of deep
ocean, and this separates two widely distinct mammalian faunas. On
either side, the islands stand on a moderately shallow submarine bank,
and these islands are inhabited by the same or by closely allied
quadrupeds. I have not as yet had time to follow up this subject in all
quarters of the world; but as far as I have gone, the relation holds
good. For instance, Britain is separated by a shallow channel from
Europe, and the mammals are the same on both sides; and so it is with
all the islands near the shores of Australia. The West Indian Islands,
on the other hand, stand on a deeply submerged bank, nearly one
thousand fathoms in depth, and here we find American forms, but the
species and even the genera are quite distinct. As the amount of
modification which animals of all kinds undergo partly depends on the
lapse of time, and as the islands which are separated from each other,
or from the mainland, by shallow channels, are more likely to have been
continuously united within a recent period than the islands separated
by deeper channels, we can understand how it is that a relation exists
between the depth of the sea separating two mammalian faunas, and the
degree of their affinity, a relation which is quite inexplicable on the
theory of independent acts of creation.

The foregoing statements in regard to the inhabitants of oceanic
islands, namely, the fewness of the species, with a large proportion
consisting of endemic forms—the members of certain groups, but not
those of other groups in the same class, having been modified—the
absence of certain whole orders, as of batrachians and of terrestrial
mammals, notwithstanding the presence of aërial bats, the singular
proportions of certain orders of plants, herbaceous forms having been
developed into trees, &c., seem to me to accord better with the belief
in the efficiency of occasional means of transport, carried on during a
long course of time, than with the belief in the former connection of
all oceanic islands with the nearest continent; for on this latter view
it is probable that the various classes would have immigrated more
uniformly, and from the species having entered in a body, their mutual
relations would not have been much disturbed, and consequently, they
would either have not been modified, or all the species in a more
equable manner.

I do not deny that there are many and serious difficulties in
understanding how many of the inhabitants of the more remote islands,
whether still retaining the same specific form or subsequently
modified, have reached their present homes. But the probability of
other islands having once existed as halting-places, of which not a
wreck now remains, must not be overlooked. I will specify one difficult
case. Almost all oceanic islands, even the most isolated and smallest,
are inhabited by land-shells, generally by endemic species, but
sometimes by species found elsewhere striking instances of which have
been given by Dr. A.A. Gould in relation to the Pacific. Now it is
notorious that land-shells are easily killed by sea-water; their eggs,
at least such as I have tried, sink in it and are killed. Yet there
must be some unknown, but occasionally efficient means for their
transportal. Would the just-hatched young sometimes adhere to the feet
of birds roosting on the ground and thus get transported? It occurred
to me that land-shells, when hybernating and having a membranous
diaphragm over the mouth of the shell, might be floated in chinks of
drifted timber across moderately wide arms of the sea. And I find that
several species in this state withstand uninjured an immersion in
sea-water during seven days. One shell, the Helix pomatia, after having
been thus treated, and again hybernating, was put into sea-water for
twenty days and perfectly recovered. During this length of time the
shell might have been carried by a marine country of average swiftness
to a distance of 660 geographical miles. As this Helix has a thick
calcareous operculum I removed it, and when it had formed a new
membranous one, I again immersed it for fourteen days in sea-water, and
again it recovered and crawled away. Baron Aucapitaine has since tried
similar experiments. He placed 100 land-shells, belonging to ten
species, in a box pierced with holes, and immersed it for a fortnight
in the sea. Out of the hundred shells twenty-seven recovered. The
presence of an operculum seems to have been of importance, as out of
twelve specimens of Cyclostoma elegans, which is thus furnished, eleven
revived. It is remarkable, seeing how well the Helix pomatia resisted
with me the salt-water, that not one of fifty-four specimens belonging
to four other species of Helix tried by Aucapitaine recovered. It is,
however, not at all probable that land-shells have often been thus
transported; the feet of birds offer a more probable method.

_On the Relations of the Inhabitants of Islands to those of the nearest
Mainland._

The most striking and important fact for us is the affinity of the
species which inhabit islands to those of the nearest mainland, without
being actually the same. Numerous instances could be given. The
Galapagos Archipelago, situated under the equator, lies at a distance
of between 500 and 600 miles from the shores of South America. Here
almost every product of the land and of the water bears the
unmistakable stamp of the American continent. There are twenty-six
land-birds. Of these twenty-one, or perhaps twenty-three, are ranked as
distinct species, and would commonly be assumed to have been here
created; yet the close affinity of most of these birds to American
species is manifest in every character in their habits, gestures, and
tones of voice. So it is with the other animals, and with a large
proportion of the plants, as shown by Dr. Hooker in his admirable Flora
of this archipelago. The naturalist, looking at the inhabitants of
these volcanic islands in the Pacific, distant several hundred miles
from the continent, feels that he is standing on American land. Why
should this be so? Why should the species which are supposed to have
been created in the Galapagos Archipelago, and nowhere else, bear so
plainly the stamp of affinity to those created in America? There is
nothing in the conditions of life, in the geological nature of the
islands, in their height or climate, or in the proportions in which the
several classes are associated together, which closely resembles the
conditions of the South American coast. In fact, there is a
considerable dissimilarity in all these respects. On the other hand,
there is a considerable degree of resemblance in the volcanic nature of
the soil, in the climate, height, and size of the islands, between the
Galapagos and Cape Verde Archipelagos: but what an entire and absolute
difference in their inhabitants! The inhabitants of the Cape Verde
Islands are related to those of Africa, like those of the Galapagos to
America. Facts, such as these, admit of no sort of explanation on the
ordinary view of independent creation; whereas, on the view here
maintained, it is obvious that the Galapagos Islands would be likely to
receive colonists from America, whether by occasional means of
transport or (though I do not believe in this doctrine) by formerly
continuous land, and the Cape Verde Islands from Africa; such colonists
would be liable to modification—the principle of inheritance still
betraying their original birthplace.

Many analogous facts could be given: indeed it is an almost universal
rule that the endemic productions of islands are related to those of
the nearest continent, or of the nearest large island. The exceptions
are few, and most of them can be explained. Thus, although Kerguelen
Land stands nearer to Africa than to America, the plants are related,
and that very closely, as we know from Dr. Hooker’s account, to those
of America: but on the view that this island has been mainly stocked by
seeds brought with earth and stones on icebergs, drifted by the
prevailing currents, this anomaly disappears. New Zealand in its
endemic plants is much more closely related to Australia, the nearest
mainland, than to any other region: and this is what might have been
expected; but it is also plainly related to South America, which,
although the next nearest continent, is so enormously remote, that the
fact becomes an anomaly. But this difficulty partially disappears on
the view that New Zealand, South America, and the other southern lands,
have been stocked in part from a nearly intermediate though distant
point, namely, from the antarctic islands, when they were clothed with
vegetation, during a warmer tertiary period, before the commencement of
the last Glacial period. The affinity, which, though feeble, I am
assured by Dr. Hooker is real, between the flora of the south-western
corner of Australia and of the Cape of Good Hope, is a far more
remarkable case; but this affinity is confined to the plants, and will,
no doubt, some day be explained.

The same law which has determined the relationship between the
inhabitants of islands and the nearest mainland, is sometimes displayed
on a small scale, but in a most interesting manner, within the limits
of the same archipelago. Thus each separate island of the Galapagos
Archipelago is tenanted, and the fact is a marvellous one, by many
distinct species; but these species are related to each other in a very
much closer manner than to the inhabitants of the American continent,
or of any other quarter of the world. This is what might have been
expected, for islands situated so near to each other would almost
necessarily receive immigrants from the same original source, and from
each other. But how is it that many of the immigrants have been
differently modified, though only in a small degree, in islands
situated within sight of each other, having the same geological nature,
the same height, climate, etc? This long appeared to me a great
difficulty: but it arises in chief part from the deeply-seated error of
considering the physical conditions of a country as the most important;
whereas it cannot be disputed that the nature of the other species with
which each has to compete, is at least as important, and generally a
far more important element of success. Now if we look to the species
which inhabit the Galapagos Archipelago, and are likewise found in
other parts of the world, we find that they differ considerably in the
several islands. This difference might indeed have been expected if the
islands have been stocked by occasional means of transport—a seed, for
instance, of one plant having been brought to one island, and that of
another plant to another island, though all proceeding from the same
general source. Hence, when in former times an immigrant first settled
on one of the islands, or when it subsequently spread from one to
another, it would undoubtedly be exposed to different conditions in the
different islands, for it would have to compete with a different set of
organisms; a plant, for instance, would find the ground best-fitted for
it occupied by somewhat different species in the different islands, and
would be exposed to the attacks of somewhat different enemies. If,
then, it varied, natural selection would probably favour different
varieties in the different islands. Some species, however, might spread
and yet retain the same character throughout the group, just as we see
some species spreading widely throughout a continent and remaining the
same.

The really surprising fact in this case of the Galapagos Archipelago,
and in a lesser degree in some analogous cases, is that each new
species after being formed in any one island, did not spread quickly to
the other islands. But the islands, though in sight of each other, are
separated by deep arms of the sea, in most cases wider than the British
Channel, and there is no reason to suppose that they have at any former
period been continuously united. The currents of the sea are rapid and
deep between the islands, and gales of wind are extraordinarily rare;
so that the islands are far more effectually separated from each other
than they appear on a map. Nevertheless, some of the species, both of
those found in other parts of the world and of those confined to the
archipelago, are common to the several islands; and we may infer from
the present manner of distribution that they have spread from one
island to the others. But we often take, I think, an erroneous view of
the probability of closely allied species invading each other’s
territory, when put into free intercommunication. Undoubtedly, if one
species has any advantage over another, it will in a very brief time
wholly or in part supplant it; but if both are equally well fitted for
their own places, both will probably hold their separate places for
almost any length of time. Being familiar with the fact that many
species, naturalised through man’s agency, have spread with astonishing
rapidity over wide areas, we are apt to infer that most species would
thus spread; but we should remember that the species which become
naturalised in new countries are not generally closely allied to the
aboriginal inhabitants, but are very distinct forms, belonging in a
large proportion of cases, as shown by Alph. de Candolle, to distinct
genera. In the Galapagos Archipelago, many even of the birds, though so
well adapted for flying from island to island, differ on the different
islands; thus there are three closely allied species of mocking-thrush,
each confined to its own island. Now let us suppose the mocking-thrush
of Chatham Island to be blown to Charles Island, which has its own
mocking-thrush; why should it succeed in establishing itself there? We
may safely infer that Charles Island is well stocked with its own
species, for annually more eggs are laid and young birds hatched than
can possibly be reared; and we may infer that the mocking-thrush
peculiar to Charles Island is at least as well fitted for its home as
is the species peculiar to Chatham Island. Sir C. Lyell and Mr.
Wollaston have communicated to me a remarkable fact bearing on this
subject; namely, that Madeira and the adjoining islet of Porto Santo
possess many distinct but representative species of land-shells, some
of which live in crevices of stone; and although large quantities of
stone are annually transported from Porto Santo to Madeira, yet this
latter island has not become colonised by the Porto Santo species:
nevertheless, both islands have been colonised by some European
land-shells, which no doubt had some advantage over the indigenous
species. From these considerations I think we need not greatly marvel
at the endemic species which inhabit the several islands of the
Galapagos Archipelago not having all spread from island to island. On
the same continent, also, pre-occupation has probably played an
important part in checking the commingling of the species which inhabit
different districts with nearly the same physical conditions. Thus, the
south-east and south-west corners of Australia have nearly the same
physical conditions, and are united by continuous land, yet they are
inhabited by a vast number of distinct mammals, birds, and plants; so
it is, according to Mr. Bates, with the butterflies and other animals
inhabiting the great, open, and continuous valley of the Amazons.

The same principle which governs the general character of the
inhabitants of oceanic islands, namely, the relation to the source
whence colonists could have been most easily derived, together with
their subsequent modification, is of the widest application throughout
nature. We see this on every mountain-summit, in every lake and marsh.
For Alpine species, excepting in as far as the same species have become
widely spread during the Glacial epoch, are related to those of the
surrounding lowlands; thus we have in South America, Alpine
humming-birds, Alpine rodents, Alpine plants, &c., all strictly
belonging to American forms; and it is obvious that a mountain, as it
became slowly upheaved, would be colonised from the surrounding
lowlands. So it is with the inhabitants of lakes and marshes, excepting
in so far as great facility of transport has allowed the same forms to
prevail throughout large portions of the world. We see the same
principle in the character of most of the blind animals inhabiting the
caves of America and of Europe. Other analogous facts could be given.
It will, I believe, be found universally true, that wherever in two
regions, let them be ever so distant, many closely allied or
representative species occur, there will likewise be found some
identical species; and wherever many closely-allied species occur,
there will be found many forms which some naturalists rank as distinct
species, and others as mere varieties; these doubtful forms showing us
the steps in the process of modification.

The relation between the power and extent of migration in certain
species, either at the present or at some former period, and the
existence at remote points of the world of closely allied species, is
shown in another and more general way. Mr. Gould remarked to me long
ago, that in those genera of birds which range over the world, many of
the species have very wide ranges. I can hardly doubt that this rule is
generally true, though difficult of proof. Among mammals, we see it
strikingly displayed in Bats, and in a lesser degree in the Felidæ and
Canidæ. We see the same rule in the distribution of butterflies and
beetles. So it is with most of the inhabitants of fresh water, for many
of the genera in the most distinct classes range over the world, and
many of the species have enormous ranges. It is not meant that all, but
that some of the species have very wide ranges in the genera which
range very widely. Nor is it meant that the species in such genera
have, on an average, a very wide range; for this will largely depend on
how far the process of modification has gone; for instance, two
varieties of the same species inhabit America and Europe, and thus the
species has an immense range; but, if variation were to be carried a
little further, the two varieties would be ranked as distinct species,
and their range would be greatly reduced. Still less is it meant, that
species which have the capacity of crossing barriers and ranging
widely, as in the case of certain powerfully-winged birds, will
necessarily range widely; for we should never forget that to range
widely implies not only the power of crossing barriers, but the more
important power of being victorious in distant lands in the struggle
for life with foreign associates. But according to the view that all
the species of a genus, though distributed to the most remote points of
the world, are descended from a single progenitor, we ought to find,
and I believe as a general rule we do find, that some at least of the
species range very widely.

We should bear in mind that many genera in all classes are of ancient
origin, and the species in this case will have had ample time for
dispersal and subsequent modification. There is also reason to believe,
from geological evidence, that within each great class the lower
organisms change at a slower rate than the higher; consequently they
will have had a better chance of ranging widely and of still retaining
the same specific character. This fact, together with that of the seeds
and eggs of most lowly organised forms being very minute and better
fitted for distant transportal, probably accounts for a law which has
long been observed, and which has lately been discussed by Alph. de
Candolle in regard to plants, namely, that the lower any group of
organisms stands the more widely it ranges.

The relations just discussed—namely, lower organisms ranging more
widely than the higher—some of the species of widely-ranging genera
themselves ranging widely—such facts, as alpine, lacustrine, and marsh
productions being generally related to those which live on the
surrounding low lands and dry lands—the striking relationship between
the inhabitants of islands and those of the nearest mainland—the still
closer relationship of the distinct inhabitants of the islands of the
same archipelago—are inexplicable on the ordinary view of the
independent creation of each species, but are explicable if we admit
colonisation from the nearest or readiest source, together with the
subsequent adaptation of the colonists to their new homes.

_Summary of the last and present Chapters._

In these chapters I have endeavoured to show that if we make due
allowance for our ignorance of the full effects of changes of climate
and of the level of the land, which have certainly occurred within the
recent period, and of other changes which have probably occurred—if we
remember how ignorant we are with respect to the many curious means of
occasional transport—if we bear in mind, and this is a very important
consideration, how often a species may have ranged continuously over a
wide area, and then have become extinct in the intermediate tracts—the
difficulty is not insuperable in believing that all the individuals of
the same species, wherever found, are descended from common parents.
And we are led to this conclusion, which has been arrived at by many
naturalists under the designation of single centres of creation, by
various general considerations, more especially from the importance of
barriers of all kinds, and from the analogical distribution of
subgenera, genera, and families.

With respect to distinct species belonging to the same genus, which on
our theory have spread from one parent-source; if we make the same
allowances as before for our ignorance, and remember that some forms of
life have changed very slowly, enormous periods of time having been
thus granted for their migration, the difficulties are far from
insuperable; though in this case, as in that of the individuals of the
same species, they are often great.

As exemplifying the effects of climatical changes on distribution, I
have attempted to show how important a part the last Glacial period has
played, which affected even the equatorial regions, and which, during
the alternations of the cold in the north and the south, allowed the
productions of opposite hemispheres to mingle, and left some of them
stranded on the mountain-summits in all parts of the world. As showing
how diversified are the means of occasional transport, I have discussed
at some little length the means of dispersal of fresh-water
productions.

If the difficulties be not insuperable in admitting that in the long
course of time all the individuals of the same species, and likewise of
the several species belonging to the same genus, have proceeded from
some one source; then all the grand leading facts of geographical
distribution are explicable on the theory of migration, together with
subsequent modification and the multiplication of new forms. We can
thus understand the high importance of barriers, whether of land or
water, in not only separating but in apparently forming the several
zoological and botanical provinces. We can thus understand the
concentration of related species within the same areas; and how it is
that under different latitudes, for instance, in South America, the
inhabitants of the plains and mountains, of the forests, marshes, and
deserts, are linked together in so mysterious a manner, and are
likewise linked to the extinct beings which formerly inhabited the same
continent. Bearing in mind that the mutual relation of organism to
organism is of the highest importance, we can see why two areas, having
nearly the same physical conditions, should often be inhabited by very
different forms of life; for according to the length of time which has
elapsed since the colonists entered one of the regions, or both;
according to the nature of the communication which allowed certain
forms and not others to enter, either in greater or lesser numbers;
according or not as those which entered happened to come into more or
less direct competition with each other and with the aborigines; and
according as the immigrants were capable of varying more or less
rapidly, there would ensue in the to or more regions, independently of
their physical conditions, infinitely diversified conditions of life;
there would be an almost endless amount of organic action and reaction,
and we should find some groups of beings greatly, and some only
slightly modified; some developed in great force, some existing in
scanty numbers—and this we do find in the several great geographical
provinces of the world.

On these same principles we can understand, as I have endeavoured to
show, why oceanic islands should have few inhabitants, but that of
these, a large proportion should be endemic or peculiar; and why, in
relation to the means of migration, one group of beings should have all
its species peculiar, and another group, even within the same class,
should have all its species the same with those in an adjoining quarter
of the world. We can see why whole groups of organisms, as batrachians
and terrestrial mammals, should be absent from oceanic islands, whilst
the most isolated islands should possess their own peculiar species of
aërial mammals or bats. We can see why, in islands, there should be
some relation between the presence of mammals, in a more or less
modified condition, and the depth of the sea between such islands and
the mainland. We can clearly see why all the inhabitants of an
archipelago, though specifically distinct on the several islets, should
be closely related to each other, and should likewise be related, but
less closely, to those of the nearest continent, or other source whence
immigrants might have been derived. We can see why, if there exist very
closely allied or representative species in two areas, however distant
from each other, some identical species will almost always there be
found.

As the late Edward Forbes often insisted, there is a striking
parallelism in the laws of life throughout time and space; the laws
governing the succession of forms in past times being nearly the same
with those governing at the present time the differences in different
areas. We see this in many facts. The endurance of each species and
group of species is continuous in time; for the apparent exceptions to
the rule are so few that they may fairly be attributed to our not
having as yet discovered in an intermediate deposit certain forms which
are absent in it, but which occur above and below: so in space, it
certainly is the general rule that the area inhabited by a single
species, or by a group of species, is continuous, and the exceptions,
which are not rare, may, as I have attempted to show, be accounted for
by former migrations under different circumstances, or through
occasional means of transport, or by the species having become extinct
in the intermediate tracts. Both in time and space species and groups
of species have their points of maximum development. Groups of species,
living during the same period of time, or living within the same area,
are often characterised by trifling features in common, as of sculpture
or colour. In looking to the long succession of past ages, as in
looking to distant provinces throughout the world, we find that species
in certain classes differ little from each other, whilst those in
another class, or only in a different section of the same order, differ
greatly from each other. In both time and space the lowly organised
members of each class generally change less than the highly organised;
but there are in both cases marked exceptions to the rule. According to
our theory, these several relations throughout time and space are
intelligible; for whether we look to the allied forms of life which
have changed during successive ages, or to those which have changed
after having migrated into distant quarters, in both cases they are
connected by the same bond of ordinary generation; in both cases the
laws of variation have been the same, and modifications have been
accumulated by the same means of natural selection.

CHAPTER XIV.
MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS: MORPHOLOGY: EMBRYOLOGY:
RUDIMENTARY ORGANS.

Classification, groups subordinate to groups—Natural system—Rules and
difficulties in classification, explained on the theory of descent with
modification—Classification of varieties—Descent always used in
classification—Analogical or adaptive characters—Affinities, general,
complex and radiating—Extinction separates and defines
groups—Morphology, between members of the same class, between parts of
the same individual—Embryology, laws of, explained by variations not
supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding
age—Rudimentary organs; their origin explained—Summary.

_Classification._

From the most remote period in the history of the world organic beings
have been found to resemble each other in descending degrees, so that
they can be classed in groups under groups. This classification is not
arbitrary like the grouping of the stars in constellations. The
existence of groups would have been of simple significance, if one
group had been exclusively fitted to inhabit the land, and another the
water; one to feed on flesh, another on vegetable matter, and so on;
but the case is widely different, for it is notorious how commonly
members of even the same subgroup have different habits. In the second
and fourth chapters, on Variation and on Natural Selection, I have
attempted to show that within each country it is the widely ranging,
the much diffused and common, that is the dominant species, belonging
to the larger genera in each class, which vary most. The varieties, or
incipient species, thus produced, ultimately become converted into new
and distinct species; and these, on the principle of inheritance, tend
to produce other new and dominant species. Consequently the groups
which are now large, and which generally include many dominant species,
tend to go on increasing in size. I further attempted to show that from
the varying descendants of each species trying to occupy as many and as
different places as possible in the economy of nature, they constantly
tend to diverge in character. This latter conclusion is supported by
observing the great diversity of forms, which, in any small area, come
into the closest competition, and by certain facts in naturalisation.

I attempted also to show that there is a steady tendency in the forms
which are increasing in number and diverging in character, to supplant
and exterminate the preceding, less divergent and less improved forms.
I request the reader to turn to the diagram illustrating the action, as
formerly explained, of these several principles; and he will see that
the inevitable result is, that the modified descendants proceeding from
one progenitor become broken up into groups subordinate to groups. In
the diagram each letter on the uppermost line may represent a genus
including several species; and the whole of the genera along this upper
line form together one class, for all are descended from one ancient
parent, and, consequently, have inherited something in common. But the
three genera on the left hand have, on this same principle, much in
common, and form a subfamily, distinct from that containing the next
two genera on the right hand, which diverged from a common parent at
the fifth stage of descent. These five genera have also much in common,
though less than when grouped in subfamilies; and they form a family
distinct from that containing the three genera still further to the
right hand, which diverged at an earlier period. And all these genera,
descended from (A), form an order distinct from the genera descended
from (I). So that we here have many species descended from a single
progenitor grouped into genera; and the genera into subfamilies,
families and orders, all under one great class. The grand fact of the
natural subordination of organic beings in groups under groups, which,
from its familiarity, does not always sufficiently strike us, is in my
judgment thus explained. No doubt organic beings, like all other
objects, can be classed in many ways, either artificially by single
characters, or more naturally by a number of characters. We know, for
instance, that minerals and the elemental substances can be thus
arranged. In this case there is of course no relation to genealogical
succession, and no cause can at present be assigned for their falling
into groups. But with organic beings the case is different, and the
view above given accords with their natural arrangement in group under
group; and no other explanation has ever been attempted.

Naturalists, as we have seen, try to arrange the species, genera and
families in each class, on what is called the Natural System. But what
is meant by this system? Some authors look at it merely as a scheme for
arranging together those living objects which are most alike, and for
separating those which are most unlike; or as an artificial method of
enunciating, as briefly as possible, general propositions—that is, by
one sentence to give the characters common, for instance, to all
mammals, by another those common to all carnivora, by another those
common to the dog-genus, and then, by adding a single sentence, a full
description is given of each kind of dog. The ingenuity and utility of
this system are indisputable. But many naturalists think that something
more is meant by the Natural System; they believe that it reveals the
plan of the Creator; but unless it be specified whether order in time
or space, or both, or what else is meant by the plan of the Creator, it
seems to me that nothing is thus added to our knowledge. Expressions
such as that famous one by Linnæus, which we often meet with in a more
or less concealed form, namely, that the characters do not make the
genus, but that the genus gives the characters, seem to imply that some
deeper bond is included in our classifications than mere resemblance. I
believe that this is the case, and that community of descent—the one
known cause of close similarity in organic beings—is the bond, which,
though observed by various degrees of modification, is partially
revealed to us by our classifications.

Let us now consider the rules followed in classification, and the
difficulties which are encountered on the view that classification
either gives some unknown plan of creation, or is simply a scheme for
enunciating general propositions and of placing together the forms most
like each other. It might have been thought (and was in ancient times
thought) that those parts of the structure which determined the habits
of life, and the general place of each being in the economy of nature,
would be of very high importance in classification. Nothing can be more
false. No one regards the external similarity of a mouse to a shrew, of
a dugong to a whale, of a whale to a fish, as of any importance. These
resemblances, though so intimately connected with the whole life of the
being, are ranked as merely “adaptive or analogical characters;” but to
the consideration of these resemblances we shall recur. It may even be
given as a general rule, that the less any part of the organisation is
concerned with special habits, the more important it becomes for
classification. As an instance: Owen, in speaking of the dugong, says,
“The generative organs, being those which are most remotely related to
the habits and food of an animal, I have always regarded as affording
very clear indications of its true affinities. We are least likely in
the modifications of these organs to mistake a merely adaptive for an
essential character.” With plants how remarkable it is that the organs
of vegetation, on which their nutrition and life depend, are of little
signification; whereas the organs of reproduction, with their product
the seed and embryo, are of paramount importance! So again, in formerly
discussing certain morphological characters which are not functionally
important, we have seen that they are often of the highest service in
classification. This depends on their constancy throughout many allied
groups; and their constancy chiefly depends on any slight deviations
not having been preserved and accumulated by natural selection, which
acts only on serviceable characters.

That the mere physiological importance of an organ does not determine
its classificatory value, is almost proved by the fact, that in allied
groups, in which the same organ, as we have every reason to suppose,
has nearly the same physiological value, its classificatory value is
widely different. No naturalist can have worked at any group without
being struck with this fact; and it has been fully acknowledged in the
writings of almost every author. It will suffice to quote the highest
authority, Robert Brown, who, in speaking of certain organs in the
Proteaceæ, says their generic importance, “like that of all their
parts, not only in this, but, as I apprehend in every natural family,
is very unequal, and in some cases seems to be entirely lost.” Again,
in another work he says, the genera of the Connaraceæ “differ in having
one or more ovaria, in the existence or absence of albumen, in the
imbricate or valvular æstivation. Any one of these characters singly
is frequently of more than generic importance, though here even, when
all taken together, they appear insufficient to separate Cnestis from
Connarus.” To give an example among insects: in one great division of
the Hymenoptera, the antennæ, as Westwood has remarked, are most
constant in structure; in another division they differ much, and the
differences are of quite subordinate value in classification; yet no
one will say that the antennæ in these two divisions of the same order
are of unequal physiological importance. Any number of instances could
be given of the varying importance for classification of the same
important organ within the same group of beings.

Again, no one will say that rudimentary or atrophied organs are of high
physiological or vital importance; yet, undoubtedly, organs in this
condition are often of much value in classification. No one will
dispute that the rudimentary teeth in the upper jaws of young
ruminants, and certain rudimentary bones of the leg, are highly
serviceable in exhibiting the close affinity between Ruminants and
Pachyderms. Robert Brown has strongly insisted on the fact that the
position of the rudimentary florets is of the highest importance in the
classification of the Grasses.

Numerous instances could be given of characters derived from parts
which must be considered of very trifling physiological importance, but
which are universally admitted as highly serviceable in the definition
of whole groups. For instance, whether or not there is an open passage
from the nostrils to the mouth, the only character, according to Owen,
which absolutely distinguishes fishes and reptiles—the inflection of
the angle of the lower jaw in Marsupials—the manner in which the wings
of insects are folded—mere colour in certain Algæ—mere pubescence on
parts of the flower in grasses—the nature of the dermal covering, as
hair or feathers, in the Vertebrata. If the Ornithorhynchus had been
covered with feathers instead of hair, this external and trifling
character would have been considered by naturalists as an important aid
in determining the degree of affinity of this strange creature to
birds.

The importance, for classification, of trifling characters, mainly
depends on their being correlated with many other characters of more or
less importance. The value indeed of an aggregate of characters is very
evident in natural history. Hence, as has often been remarked, a
species may depart from its allies in several characters, both of high
physiological importance, and of almost universal prevalence, and yet
leave us in no doubt where it should be ranked. Hence, also, it has
been found that a classification founded on any single character,
however important that may be, has always failed; for no part of the
organisation is invariably constant. The importance of an aggregate of
characters, even when none are important, alone explains the aphorism
enunciated by Linnæus, namely, that the characters do not give the
genus, but the genus gives the character; for this seems founded on the
appreciation of many trifling points of resemblance, too slight to be
defined. Certain plants, belonging to the Malpighiaceæ, bear perfect
and degraded flowers; in the latter, as A. de Jussieu has remarked,
“The greater number of the characters proper to the species, to the
genus, to the family, to the class, disappear, and thus laugh at our
classification.” When Aspicarpa produced in France, during several
years, only these degraded flowers, departing so wonderfully in a
number of the most important points of structure from the proper type
of the order, yet M. Richard sagaciously saw, as Jussieu observes, that
this genus should still be retained among the Malpighiaceæ. This case
well illustrates the spirit of our classifications.

Practically, when naturalists are at work, they do not trouble
themselves about the physiological value of the characters which they
use in defining a group or in allocating any particular species. If
they find a character nearly uniform, and common to a great number of
forms, and not common to others, they use it as one of high value; if
common to some lesser number, they use it as of subordinate value. This
principle has been broadly confessed by some naturalists to be the true
one; and by none more clearly than by that excellent botanist, Aug. St.
Hilaire. If several trifling characters are always found in
combination, though no apparent bond of connexion can be discovered
between them, especial value is set on them. As in most groups of
animals, important organs, such as those for propelling the blood, or
for aerating it, or those for propagating the race, are found nearly
uniform, they are considered as highly serviceable in classification;
but in some groups all these, the most important vital organs, are
found to offer characters of quite subordinate value. Thus, as Fritz
Müller has lately remarked, in the same group of crustaceans, Cypridina
is furnished with a heart, while in two closely allied genera, namely
Cypris and Cytherea, there is no such organ; one species of Cypridina
has well-developed branchiæ, while another species is destitute of
them.

We can see why characters derived from the embryo should be of equal
importance with those derived from the adult, for a natural
classification of course includes all ages. But it is by no means
obvious, on the ordinary view, why the structure of the embryo should
be more important for this purpose than that of the adult, which alone
plays its full part in the economy of nature. Yet it has been strongly
urged by those great naturalists, Milne Edwards and Agassiz, that
embryological characters are the most important of all; and this
doctrine has very generally been admitted as true. Nevertheless, their
importance has sometimes been exaggerated, owing to the adaptive
characters of larvæ not having been excluded; in order to show this,
Fritz Müller arranged, by the aid of such characters alone, the great
class of crustaceans, and the arrangement did not prove a natural one.
But there can be no doubt that embryonic, excluding larval characters,
are of the highest value for classification, not only with animals but
with plants. Thus the main divisions of flowering plants are founded on
differences in the embryo—on the number and position of the cotyledons,
and on the mode of development of the plumule and radicle. We shall
immediately see why these characters possess so high a value in
classification, namely, from the natural system being genealogical in
its arrangement.

Our classifications are often plainly influenced by chains of
affinities. Nothing can be easier than to define a number of characters
common to all birds; but with crustaceans, any such definition has
hitherto been found impossible. There are crustaceans at the opposite
ends of the series, which have hardly a character in common; yet the
species at both ends, from being plainly allied to others, and these to
others, and so onwards, can be recognised as unequivocally belonging to
this, and to no other class of the Articulata.

Geographical distribution has often been used, though perhaps not quite
logically, in classification, more especially in very large groups of
closely allied forms. Temminck insists on the utility or even necessity
of this practice in certain groups of birds; and it has been followed
by several entomologists and botanists.

Finally, with respect to the comparative value of the various groups of
species, such as orders, suborders, families, subfamilies, and genera,
they seem to be, at least at present, almost arbitrary. Several of the
best botanists, such as Mr. Bentham and others, have strongly insisted
on their arbitrary value. Instances could be given among plants and
insects, of a group first ranked by practised naturalists as only a
genus, and then raised to the rank of a subfamily or family; and this
has been done, not because further research has detected important
structural differences, at first overlooked, but because numerous
allied species, with slightly different grades of difference, have been
subsequently discovered.

All the foregoing rules and aids and difficulties in classification may
be explained, if I do not greatly deceive myself, on the view that the
natural system is founded on descent with modification—that the
characters which naturalists consider as showing true affinity between
any two or more species, are those which have been inherited from a
common parent, all true classification being genealogical—that
community of descent is the hidden bond which naturalists have been
unconsciously seeking, and not some unknown plan of creation, or the
enunciation of general propositions, and the mere putting together and
separating objects more or less alike.

But I must explain my meaning more fully. I believe that the
_arrangement_ of the groups within each class, in due subordination and
relation to each other, must be strictly genealogical in order to be
natural; but that the _amount_ of difference in the several branches or
groups, though allied in the same degree in blood to their common
progenitor, may differ greatly, being due to the different degrees of
modification which they have undergone; and this is expressed by the
forms being ranked under different genera, families, sections or
orders. The reader will best understand what is meant, if he will take
the trouble to refer to the diagram in the fourth chapter. We will
suppose the letters A to L to represent allied genera existing during
the Silurian epoch, and descended from some still earlier form. In
three of these genera (A, F, and I) a species has transmitted modified
descendants to the present day, represented by the fifteen genera
(_a_14 to _z_14) on the uppermost horizontal line. Now, all these
modified descendants from a single species are related in blood or
descent in the same degree. They may metaphorically be called cousins
to the same millionth degree, yet they differ widely and in different
degrees from each other. The forms descended from A, now broken up into
two or three families, constitute a distinct order from those descended
from I, also broken up into two families. Nor can the existing species
descended from A be ranked in the same genus with the parent A, or
those from I with parent I. But the existing genus F14 may be supposed
to have been but slightly modified, and it will then rank with the
parent genus F; just as some few still living organisms belong to
Silurian genera. So that the comparative value of the differences
between these organic beings, which are all related to each other in
the same degree in blood, has come to be widely different.
Nevertheless, their genealogical _arrangement_ remains strictly true,
not only at the present time, but at each successive period of descent.
All the modified descendants from A will have inherited something in
common from their common parent, as will all the descendants from I; so
will it be with each subordinate branch of descendants at each
successive stage. If, however, we suppose any descendant of A or of I
to have become so much modified as to have lost all traces of its
parentage in this case, its place in the natural system will be lost,
as seems to have occurred with some few existing organisms. All the
descendants of the genus F, along its whole line of descent, are
supposed to have been but little modified, and they form a single
genus. But this genus, though much isolated, will still occupy its
proper intermediate position. The representation of the groups as here
given in the diagram on a flat surface, is much too simple. The
branches ought to have diverged in all directions. If the names of the
groups had been simply written down in a linear series the
representation would have been still less natural; and it is
notoriously not possible to represent in a series, on a flat surface,
the affinities which we discover in nature among the beings of the same
group. Thus, the natural system is genealogical in its arrangement,
like a pedigree. But the amount of modification which the different
groups have undergone has to be expressed by ranking them under
different so-called genera, subfamilies, families, sections, orders,
and classes.

It may be worth while to illustrate this view of classification, by
taking the case of languages. If we possessed a perfect pedigree of
mankind, a genealogical arrangement of the races of man would afford
the best classification of the various languages now spoken throughout
the world; and if all extinct languages, and all intermediate and
slowly changing dialects, were to be included, such an arrangement
would be the only possible one. Yet it might be that some ancient
languages had altered very little and had given rise to few new
languages, whilst others had altered much owing to the spreading,
isolation and state of civilisation of the several co-descended races,
and had thus given rise to many new dialects and languages. The various
degrees of difference between the languages of the same stock would
have to be expressed by groups subordinate to groups; but the proper or
even the only possible arrangement would still be genealogical; and
this would be strictly natural, as it would connect together all
languages, extinct and recent, by the closest affinities, and would
give the filiation and origin of each tongue.

In confirmation of this view, let us glance at the classification of
varieties, which are known or believed to be descended from a single
species. These are grouped under the species, with the subvarieties
under the varieties; and in some cases, as with the domestic pigeon,
with several other grades of difference. Nearly the same rules are
followed as in classifying species. Authors have insisted on the
necessity of arranging varieties on a natural instead of an artificial
system; we are cautioned, for instance, not to class two varieties of
the pine-apple together, merely because their fruit, though the most
important part, happens to be nearly identical; no one puts the Swedish
and common turnip together, though the esculent and thickened stems are
so similar. Whatever part is found to be most constant, is used in
classing varieties: thus the great agriculturist Marshall says the
horns are very useful for this purpose with cattle, because they are
less variable than the shape or colour of the body, &c.; whereas with
sheep the horns are much less serviceable, because less constant. In
classing varieties, I apprehend that if we had a real pedigree, a
genealogical classification would be universally preferred; and it has
been attempted in some cases. For we might feel sure, whether there had
been more or less modification, that the principle of inheritance would
keep the forms together which were allied in the greatest number of
points. In tumbler pigeons, though some of the subvarieties differ in
the important character of the length of the beak, yet all are kept
together from having the common habit of tumbling; but the short-faced
breed has nearly or quite lost this habit; nevertheless, without any
thought on the subject, these tumblers are kept in the same group,
because allied in blood and alike in some other respects.

With species in a state of nature, every naturalist has in fact brought
descent into his classification; for he includes in his lowest grade,
that of species, the two sexes; and how enormously these sometimes
differ in the most important characters is known to every naturalist:
scarcely a single fact can be predicated in common of the adult males
and hermaphrodites of certain cirripedes, and yet no one dreams of
separating them. As soon as the three Orchidean forms, Monachanthus,
Myanthus, and Catasetum, which had previously been ranked as three
distinct genera, were known to be sometimes produced on the same plant,
they were immediately considered as varieties; and now I have been able
to show that they are the male, female, and hermaphrodite forms of the
same species. The naturalist includes as one species the various larval
stages of the same individual, however much they may differ from each
other and from the adult; as well as the so-called alternate
generations of Steenstrup, which can only in a technical sense be
considered as the same individual. He includes monsters and varieties,
not from their partial resemblance to the parent-form, but because they
are descended from it.

As descent has universally been used in classing together the
individuals of the same species, though the males and females and larvæ
are sometimes extremely different; and as it has been used in classing
varieties which have undergone a certain, and sometimes a considerable
amount of modification, may not this same element of descent have been
unconsciously used in grouping species under genera, and genera under
higher groups, all under the so-called natural system? I believe it has
been unconsciously used; and thus only can I understand the several
rules and guides which have been followed by our best systematists. As
we have no written pedigrees, we are forced to trace community of
descent by resemblances of any kind. Therefore, we choose those
characters which are the least likely to have been modified, in
relation to the conditions of life to which each species has been
recently exposed. Rudimentary structures on this view are as good as,
or even sometimes better than other parts of the organisation. We care
not how trifling a character may be—let it be the mere inflection of
the angle of the jaw, the manner in which an insect’s wing is folded,
whether the skin be covered by hair or feathers—if it prevail
throughout many and different species, especially those having very
different habits of life, it assumes high value; for we can account for
its presence in so many forms with such different habits, only by
inheritance from a common parent. We may err in this respect in regard
to single points of structure, but when several characters, let them be
ever so trifling, concur throughout a large group of beings having
different habits, we may feel almost sure, on the theory of descent,
that these characters have been inherited from a common ancestor; and
we know that such aggregated characters have especial value in
classification.

We can understand why a species or a group of species may depart from
its allies, in several of its most important characteristics, and yet
be safely classed with them. This may be safely done, and is often
done, as long as a sufficient number of characters, let them be ever so
unimportant, betrays the hidden bond of community of descent. Let two
forms have not a single character in common, yet, if these extreme
forms are connected together by a chain of intermediate groups, we may
at once infer their community of descent, and we put them all into the
same class. As we find organs of high physiological importance—those
which serve to preserve life under the most diverse conditions of
existence—are generally the most constant, we attach especial value to
them; but if these same organs, in another group or section of a group,
are found to differ much, we at once value them less in our
classification. We shall presently see why embryological characters are
of such high classificatory importance. Geographical distribution may
sometimes be brought usefully into play in classing large genera,
because all the species of the same genus, inhabiting any distinct and
isolated region, are in all probability descended from the same
parents.

_Analogical Resemblances._—We can understand, on the above views, the
very important distinction between real affinities and analogical or
adaptive resemblances. Lamarck first called attention to this subject,
and he has been ably followed by Macleay and others. The resemblance in
the shape of the body and in the fin-like anterior limbs between
dugongs and whales, and between these two orders of mammals and fishes,
are analogical. So is the resemblance between a mouse and a shrew-mouse
(Sorex), which belong to different orders; and the still closer
resemblance, insisted on by Mr. Mivart, between the mouse and a small
marsupial animal (Antechinus) of Australia. These latter resemblances
may be accounted for, as it seems to me, by adaptation for similarly
active movements through thickets and herbage, together with
concealment from enemies.

Among insects there are innumerable instances; thus Linnæus, misled by
external appearances, actually classed an homopterous insect as a moth.
We see something of the same kind even with our domestic varieties, as
in the strikingly similar shape of the body in the improved breeds of
the Chinese and common pig, which are descended from distinct species;
and in the similarly thickened stems of the common and specifically
distinct Swedish turnip. The resemblance between the greyhound and
race-horse is hardly more fanciful than the analogies which have been
drawn by some authors between widely different animals.

On the view of characters being of real importance for classification,
only in so far as they reveal descent, we can clearly understand why
analogical or adaptive characters, although of the utmost importance to
the welfare of the being, are almost valueless to the systematist. For
animals, belonging to two most distinct lines of descent, may have
become adapted to similar conditions, and thus have assumed a close
external resemblance; but such resemblances will not reveal—will rather
tend to conceal their blood-relationship. We can thus also understand
the apparent paradox, that the very same characters are analogical when
one group is compared with another, but give true affinities when the
members of the same group are compared together: thus the shape of the
body and fin-like limbs are only analogical when whales are compared
with fishes, being adaptations in both classes for swimming through the
water; but between the the several members of the whale family, the
shape of the body and the fin-like limbs offer characters exhibiting
true affinity; for as these parts are so nearly similar throughout the
whole family, we cannot doubt that they have been inherited from a
common ancestor. So it is with fishes.

Numerous cases could be given of striking resemblances in quite
distinct beings between single parts or organs, which have been adapted
for the same functions. A good instance is afforded by the close
resemblance of the jaws of the dog and Tasmanian wolf or
Thylacinus—animals which are widely sundered in the natural system. But
this resemblance is confined to general appearance, as in the
prominence of the canines, and in the cutting shape of the molar teeth.
For the teeth really differ much: thus the dog has on each side of the
upper jaw four pre-molars and only two molars; while the Thylacinus has
three pre-molars and four molars. The molars also differ much in the
two animals in relative size and structure. The adult dentition is
preceded by a widely different milk dentition. Any one may, of course,
deny that the teeth in either case have been adapted for tearing flesh,
through the natural selection of successive variations; but if this be
admitted in the one case, it is unintelligible to me that it should be
denied in the other. I am glad to find that so high an authority as
Professor Flower has come to this same conclusion.

The extraordinary cases given in a former chapter, of widely different
fishes possessing electric organs—of widely different insects
possessing luminous organs—and of orchids and asclepiads having
pollen-masses with viscid discs, come under this same head of
analogical resemblances. But these cases are so wonderful that they
were introduced as difficulties or objections to our theory. In all
such cases some fundamental difference in the growth or development of
the parts, and generally in their matured structure, can be detected.
The end gained is the same, but the means, though appearing
superficially to be the same, are essentially different. The principle
formerly alluded to under the term of _analogical variation_ has
probably in these cases often come into play; that is, the members of
the same class, although only distantly allied, have inherited so much
in common in their constitution, that they are apt to vary under
similar exciting causes in a similar manner; and this would obviously
aid in the acquirement through natural selection of parts or organs,
strikingly like each other, independently of their direct inheritance
from a common progenitor.

As species belonging to distinct classes have often been adapted by
successive slight modifications to live under nearly similar
circumstances—to inhabit, for instance, the three elements of land, air
and water—we can perhaps understand how it is that a numerical
parallelism has sometimes been observed between the subgroups of
distinct classes. A naturalist, struck with a parallelism of this
nature, by arbitrarily raising or sinking the value of the groups in
several classes (and all our experience shows that their valuation is
as yet arbitrary), could easily extend the parallelism over a wide
range; and thus the septenary, quinary, quaternary and ternary
classifications have probably arisen.

There is another and curious class of cases in which close external
resemblance does not depend on adaptation to similar habits of life,
but has been gained for the sake of protection. I allude to the
wonderful manner in which certain butterflies imitate, as first
described by Mr. Bates, other and quite distinct species. This
excellent observer has shown that in some districts of South America,
where, for instance, an Ithomia abounds in gaudy swarms, another
butterfly, namely, a Leptalis, is often found mingled in the same
flock; and the latter so closely resembles the Ithomia in every shade
and stripe of colour, and even in the shape of its wings, that Mr.
Bates, with his eyes sharpened by collecting during eleven years, was,
though always on his guard, continually deceived. When the mockers and
the mocked are caught and compared, they are found to be very different
in essential structure, and to belong not only to distinct genera, but
often to distinct families. Had this mimicry occurred in only one or
two instances, it might have been passed over as a strange coincidence.
But, if we proceed from a district where one Leptalis imitates an
Ithomia, another mocking and mocked species, belonging to the same two
genera, equally close in their resemblance, may be found. Altogether no
less than ten genera are enumerated, which include species that imitate
other butterflies. The mockers and mocked always inhabit the same
region; we never find an imitator living remote from the form which it
imitates. The mockers are almost invariably rare insects; the mocked in
almost every case abounds in swarms. In the same district in which a
species of Leptalis closely imitates an Ithomia, there are sometimes
other Lepidoptera mimicking the same Ithomia: so that in the same
place, species of three genera of butterflies and even a moth are found
all closely resembling a butterfly belonging to a fourth genus. It
deserves especial notice that many of the mimicking forms of the
Leptalis, as well as of the mimicked forms, can be shown by a graduated
series to be merely varieties of the same species; while others are
undoubtedly distinct species. But why, it may be asked, are certain
forms treated as the mimicked and others as the mimickers? Mr. Bates
satisfactorily answers this question by showing that the form which is
imitated keeps the usual dress of the group to which it belongs, while
the counterfeiters have changed their dress and do not resemble their
nearest allies.

We are next led to enquire what reason can be assigned for certain
butterflies and moths so often assuming the dress of another and quite
distinct form; why, to the perplexity of naturalists, has nature
condescended to the tricks of the stage? Mr. Bates has, no doubt, hit
on the true explanation. The mocked forms, which always abound in
numbers, must habitually escape destruction to a large extent,
otherwise they could not exist in such swarms; and a large amount of
evidence has now been collected, showing that they are distasteful to
birds and other insect-devouring animals. The mocking forms, on the
other hand, that inhabit the same district, are comparatively rare, and
belong to rare groups; hence, they must suffer habitually from some
danger, for otherwise, from the number of eggs laid by all butterflies,
they would in three or four generations swarm over the whole country.
Now if a member of one of these persecuted and rare groups were to
assume a dress so like that of a well-protected species that it
continually deceived the practised eyes of an entomologist, it would
often deceive predaceous birds and insects, and thus often escape
destruction. Mr. Bates may almost be said to have actually witnessed
the process by which the mimickers have come so closely to resemble the
mimicked; for he found that some of the forms of Leptalis which mimic
so many other butterflies, varied in an extreme degree. In one district
several varieties occurred, and of these one alone resembled, to a
certain extent, the common Ithomia of the same district. In another
district there were two or three varieties, one of which was much
commoner than the others, and this closely mocked another form of
Ithomia. From facts of this nature, Mr. Bates concludes that the
Leptalis first varies; and when a variety happens to resemble in some
degree any common butterfly inhabiting the same district, this variety,
from its resemblance to a flourishing and little persecuted kind, has a
better chance of escaping destruction from predaceous birds and
insects, and is consequently oftener preserved; “the less perfect
degrees of resemblance being generation after generation eliminated,
and only the others left to propagate their kind.” So that here we have
an excellent illustration of natural selection.

Messrs. Wallace and Trimen have likewise described several equally
striking cases of imitation in the Lepidoptera of the Malay Archipelago
and Africa, and with some other insects. Mr. Wallace has also detected
one such case with birds, but we have none with the larger quadrupeds.
The much greater frequency of imitation with insects than with other
animals, is probably the consequence of their small size; insects
cannot defend themselves, excepting indeed the kinds furnished with a
sting, and I have never heard of an instance of such kinds mocking
other insects, though they are mocked; insects cannot easily escape by
flight from the larger animals which prey on them; therefore, speaking
metaphorically, they are reduced, like most weak creatures, to trickery
and dissimulation.

It should be observed that the process of imitation probably never
commenced between forms widely dissimilar in colour. But, starting with
species already somewhat like each other, the closest resemblance, if
beneficial, could readily be gained by the above means, and if the
imitated form was subsequently and gradually modified through any
agency, the imitating form would be led along the same track, and thus
be altered to almost any extent, so that it might ultimately assume an
appearance or colouring wholly unlike that of the other members of the
family to which it belonged. There is, however, some difficulty on this
head, for it is necessary to suppose in some cases that ancient members
belonging to several distinct groups, before they had diverged to their
present extent, accidentally resembled a member of another and
protected group in a sufficient degree to afford some slight
protection, this having given the basis for the subsequent acquisition
of the most perfect resemblance.

_On the Nature of the Affinities connecting Organic Beings._—As the
modified descendants of dominant species, belonging to the larger
genera, tend to inherit the advantages which made the groups to which
they belong large and their parents dominant, they are almost sure to
spread widely, and to seize on more and more places in the economy of
nature. The larger and more dominant groups within each class thus tend
to go on increasing in size, and they consequently supplant many
smaller and feebler groups. Thus, we can account for the fact that all
organisms, recent and extinct, are included under a few great orders
and under still fewer classes. As showing how few the higher groups are
in number, and how widely they are spread throughout the world, the
fact is striking that the discovery of Australia has not added an
insect belonging to a new class, and that in the vegetable kingdom, as
I learn from Dr. Hooker, it has added only two or three families of
small size.

In the chapter on geological succession I attempted to show, on the
principle of each group having generally diverged much in character
during the long-continued process of modification, how it is that the
more ancient forms of life often present characters in some degree
intermediate between existing groups. As some few of the old and
intermediate forms having transmitted to the present day descendants
but little modified, these constitute our so-called osculant or
aberrant groups. The more aberrant any form is, the greater must be the
number of connecting forms which have been exterminated and utterly
lost. And we have evidence of aberrant groups having suffered severely
from extinction, for they are almost always represented by extremely
few species; and such species as do occur are generally very distinct
from each other, which again implies extinction. The genera
Ornithorhynchus and Lepidosiren, for example, would not have been less
aberrant had each been represented by a dozen species, instead of as at
present by a single one, or by two or three. We can, I think, account
for this fact only by looking at aberrant groups as forms which have
been conquered by more successful competitors, with a few members still
preserved under unusually favourable conditions.

Mr. Waterhouse has remarked that when a member belonging to one group
of animals exhibits an affinity to a quite distinct group, this
affinity in most cases is general and not special: thus, according to
Mr. Waterhouse, of all Rodents, the bizcacha is most nearly related to
Marsupials; but in the points in which it approaches this order, its
relations are general, that is, not to any one Marsupial species more
than to another. As these points of affinity are believed to be real
and not merely adaptive, they must be due in accordance with our view
to inheritance from a common progenitor. Therefore, we must suppose
either that all Rodents, including the bizcacha, branched off from some
ancient Marsupial, which will naturally have been more or less
intermediate in character with respect to all existing Marsupials; or
that both Rodents and Marsupials branched off from a common progenitor,
and that both groups have since undergone much modification in
divergent directions. On either view we must suppose that the bizcacha
has retained, by inheritance, more of the character of its ancient
progenitor than have other Rodents; and therefore it will not be
specially related to any one existing Marsupial, but indirectly to all
or nearly all Marsupials, from having partially retained the character
of their common progenitor, or of some early member of the group. On
the other hand, of all Marsupials, as Mr. Waterhouse has remarked, the
Phascolomys resembles most nearly, not any one species, but the general
order of Rodents. In this case, however, it may be strongly suspected
that the resemblance is only analogical, owing to the Phascolomys
having become adapted to habits like those of a Rodent. The elder De
Candolle has made nearly similar observations on the general nature of
the affinities of distinct families of plants.

On the principle of the multiplication and gradual divergence in
character of the species descended from a common progenitor, together
with their retention by inheritance of some characters in common, we
can understand the excessively complex and radiating affinities by
which all the members of the same family or higher group are connected
together. For the common progenitor of a whole family, now broken up by
extinction into distinct groups and subgroups, will have transmitted
some of its characters, modified in various ways and degrees, to all
the species; and they will consequently be related to each other by
circuitous lines of affinity of various lengths (as may be seen in the
diagram so often referred to), mounting up through many predecessors.
As it is difficult to show the blood-relationship between the numerous
kindred of any ancient and noble family, even by the aid of a
genealogical tree, and almost impossible to do so without this aid, we
can understand the extraordinary difficulty which naturalists have
experienced in describing, without the aid of a diagram, the various
affinities which they perceive between the many living and extinct
members of the same great natural class.

Extinction, as we have seen in the fourth chapter, has played an
important part in defining and widening the intervals between the
several groups in each class. We may thus account for the distinctness
of whole classes from each other—for instance, of birds from all other
vertebrate animals—by the belief that many ancient forms of life have
been utterly lost, through which the early progenitors of birds were
formerly connected with the early progenitors of the other and at that
time less differentiated vertebrate classes. There has been much less
extinction of the forms of life which once connected fishes with
Batrachians. There has been still less within some whole classes, for
instance the Crustacea, for here the most wonderfully diverse forms are
still linked together by a long and only partially broken chain of
affinities. Extinction has only defined the groups: it has by no means
made them; for if every form which has ever lived on this earth were
suddenly to reappear, though it would be quite impossible to give
definitions by which each group could be distinguished, still a natural
classification, or at least a natural arrangement, would be possible.
We shall see this by turning to the diagram: the letters, A to L, may
represent eleven Silurian genera, some of which have produced large
groups of modified descendants, with every link in each branch and
sub-branch still alive; and the links not greater than those between
existing varieties. In this case it would be quite impossible to give
definitions by which the several members of the several groups could be
distinguished from their more immediate parents and descendants. Yet
the arrangement in the diagram would still hold good and would be
natural; for, on the principle of inheritance, all the forms descended,
for instance from A, would have something in common. In a tree we can
distinguish this or that branch, though at the actual fork the two
unite and blend together. We could not, as I have said, define the
several groups; but we could pick out types, or forms, representing
most of the characters of each group, whether large or small, and thus
give a general idea of the value of the differences between them. This
is what we should be driven to, if we were ever to succeed in
collecting all the forms in any one class which have lived throughout
all time and space. Assuredly we shall never succeed in making so
perfect a collection: nevertheless, in certain classes, we are tending
toward this end; and Milne Edwards has lately insisted, in an able
paper, on the high importance of looking to types, whether or not we
can separate and define the groups to which such types belong.

Finally, we have seen that natural selection, which follows from the
struggle for existence, and which almost inevitably leads to extinction
and divergence of character in the descendants from any one
parent-species, explains that great and universal feature in the
affinities of all organic beings, namely, their subordination in group
under group. We use the element of descent in classing the individuals
of both sexes and of all ages under one species, although they may have
but few characters in common; we use descent in classing acknowledged
varieties, however different they may be from their parents; and I
believe that this element of descent is the hidden bond of connexion
which naturalists have sought under the term of the Natural System. On
this idea of the natural system being, in so far as it has been
perfected, genealogical in its arrangement, with the grades of
difference expressed by the terms genera, families, orders, &c., we can
understand the rules which we are compelled to follow in our
classification. We can understand why we value certain resemblances far
more than others; why we use rudimentary and useless organs, or others
of trifling physiological importance; why, in finding the relations
between one group and another, we summarily reject analogical or
adaptive characters, and yet use these same characters within the
limits of the same group. We can clearly see how it is that all living
and extinct forms can be grouped together within a few great classes;
and how the several members of each class are connected together by the
most complex and radiating lines of affinities. We shall never,
probably, disentangle the inextricable web of the affinities between
the members of any one class; but when we have a distinct object in
view, and do not look to some unknown plan of creation, we may hope to
make sure but slow progress.

Professor Haeckel in his “Generelle Morphologie” and in another works,
has recently brought his great knowledge and abilities to bear on what
he calls phylogeny, or the lines of descent of all organic beings. In
drawing up the several series he trusts chiefly to embryological
characters, but receives aid from homologous and rudimentary organs, as
well as from the successive periods at which the various forms of life
are believed to have first appeared in our geological formations. He
has thus boldly made a great beginning, and shows us how classification
will in the future be treated.

_Morphology._

We have seen that the members of the same class, independently of their
habits of life, resemble each other in the general plan of their
organisation. This resemblance is often expressed by the term “unity of
type;” or by saying that the several parts and organs in the different
species of the class are homologous. The whole subject is included
under the general term of Morphology. This is one of the most
interesting departments of natural history, and may almost be said to
be its very soul. What can be more curious than that the hand of a man,
formed for grasping, that of a mole for digging, the leg of the horse,
the paddle of the porpoise, and the wing of the bat, should all be
constructed on the same pattern, and should include similar bones, in
the same relative positions? How curious it is, to give a subordinate
though striking instance, that the hind feet of the kangaroo, which are
so well fitted for bounding over the open plains—those of the climbing,
leaf-eating koala, equally well fitted for grasping the branches of
trees—those of the ground-dwelling, insect or root-eating,
bandicoots—and those of some other Australian marsupials—should all be
constructed on the same extraordinary type, namely with the bones of
the second and third digits extremely slender and enveloped within the
same skin, so that they appear like a single toe furnished with two
claws. Notwithstanding this similarity of pattern, it is obvious that
the hind feet of these several animals are used for as widely different
purposes as it is possible to conceive. The case is rendered all the
more striking by the American opossums, which follow nearly the same
habits of life as some of their Australian relatives, having feet
constructed on the ordinary plan. Professor Flower, from whom these
statements are taken, remarks in conclusion: “We may call this
conformity to type, without getting much nearer to an explanation of
the phenomenon;” and he then adds “but is it not powerfully suggestive
of true relationship, of inheritance from a common ancestor?”

Geoffroy St. Hilaire has strongly insisted on the high importance of
relative position or connexion in homologous parts; they may differ to
almost any extent in form and size, and yet remain connected together
in the same invariable order. We never find, for instance, the bones of
the arm and forearm, or of the thigh and leg, transposed. Hence the
same names can be given to the homologous bones in widely different
animals. We see the same great law in the construction of the mouths of
insects: what can be more different than the immensely long spiral
proboscis of a sphinx-moth, the curious folded one of a bee or bug, and
the great jaws of a beetle? Yet all these organs, serving for such
widely different purposes, are formed by infinitely numerous
modifications of an upper lip, mandibles, and two pairs of maxillæ. The
same law governs the construction of the mouths and limbs of
crustaceans. So it is with the flowers of plants.

Nothing can be more hopeless than to attempt to explain this similarity
of pattern in members of the same class, by utility or by the doctrine
of final causes. The hopelessness of the attempt has been expressly
admitted by Owen in his most interesting work on the “Nature of Limbs.”
On the ordinary view of the independent creation of each being, we can
only say that so it is; that it has pleased the Creator to construct
all the animals and plants in each great class on a uniform plan; but
this is not a scientific explanation.

The explanation is to a large extent simple, on the theory of the
selection of successive slight modifications, each being profitable in
some way to the modified form, but often affecting by correlation other
parts of the organisation. In changes of this nature, there will be
little or no tendency to alter the original pattern, or to transpose
the parts. The bones of a limb might be shortened and flattened to any
extent, becoming at the same time enveloped in thick membrane, so as to
serve as a fin; or a webbed hand might have all its bones, or certain
bones, lengthened to any extent, with the membrane connecting them
increased, so as to serve as a wing; yet all these modifications would
not tend to alter the framework of the bones or the relative connexion
of the parts. If we suppose that an early progenitor—the archetype, as
it may be called—of all mammals, birds and reptiles, had its limbs
constructed on the existing general pattern, for whatever purpose they
served, we can at once perceive the plain signification of the
homologous construction of the limbs throughout the class. So with the
mouths of insects, we have only to suppose that their common progenitor
had an upper lip, mandibles, and two pairs of maxillæ, these parts
being perhaps very simple in form; and then natural selection will
account for the infinite diversity in structure and function of the
mouths of insects. Nevertheless, it is conceivable that the general
pattern of an organ might become so much obscured as to be finally
lost, by the reduction and ultimately by the complete abortion of
certain parts, by the fusion of other parts, and by the doubling or
multiplication of others, variations which we know to be within the
limits of possibility. In the paddles of the gigantic extinct
sea-lizards, and in the mouths of certain suctorial crustaceans, the
general pattern seems thus to have become partially obscured.

There is another and equally curious branch of our subject; namely,
serial homologies, or the comparison of the different parts or organs
in the same individual, and not of the same parts or organs in
different members of the same class. Most physiologists believe that
the bones of the skull are homologous—that is, correspond in number and
in relative connexion—with the elemental parts of a certain number of
vertebræ. The anterior and posterior limbs in all the higher vertebrate
classes are plainly homologous. So it is with the wonderfully complex
jaws and legs of crustaceans. It is familiar to almost every one, that
in a flower the relative position of the sepals, petals, stamens, and
pistils, as well as their intimate structure, are intelligible on the
view that they consist of metamorphosed leaves, arranged in a spire. In
monstrous plants, we often get direct evidence of the possibility of
one organ being transformed into another; and we can actually see,
during the early or embryonic stages of development in flowers, as well
as in crustaceans and many other animals, that organs, which when
mature become extremely different are at first exactly alike.

How inexplicable are the cases of serial homologies on the ordinary
view of creation! Why should the brain be enclosed in a box composed of
such numerous and such extraordinarily shaped pieces of bone apparently
representing vertebræ? As Owen has remarked, the benefit derived from
the yielding of the separate pieces in the act of parturition by
mammals, will by no means explain the same construction in the skulls
of birds and reptiles. Why should similar bones have been created to
form the wing and the leg of a bat, used as they are for such totally
different purposes, namely flying and walking? Why should one
crustacean, which has an extremely complex mouth formed of many parts,
consequently always have fewer legs; or conversely, those with many
legs have simpler mouths? Why should the sepals, petals, stamens, and
pistils, in each flower, though fitted for such distinct purposes, be
all constructed on the same pattern?

On the theory of natural selection, we can, to a certain extent, answer
these questions. We need not here consider how the bodies of some
animals first became divided into a series of segments, or how they
became divided into right and left sides, with corresponding organs,
for such questions are almost beyond investigation. It is, however,
probable that some serial structures are the result of cells
multiplying by division, entailing the multiplication of the parts
developed from such cells. It must suffice for our purpose to bear in
mind that an indefinite repetition of the same part or organ is the
common characteristic, as Owen has remarked, of all low or little
specialised forms; therefore the unknown progenitor of the Vertebrata
probably possessed many vertebræ; the unknown progenitor of the
Articulata, many segments; and the unknown progenitor of flowering
plants, many leaves arranged in one or more spires. We have also
formerly seen that parts many times repeated are eminently liable to
vary, not only in number, but in form. Consequently such parts, being
already present in considerable numbers, and being highly variable,
would naturally afford the materials for adaptation to the most
different purposes; yet they would generally retain, through the force
of inheritance, plain traces of their original or fundamental
resemblance. They would retain this resemblance all the more, as the
variations, which afforded the basis for their subsequent modification
through natural selection, would tend from the first to be similar; the
parts being at an early stage of growth alike, and being subjected to
nearly the same conditions. Such parts, whether more or less modified,
unless their common origin became wholly obscured, would be serially
homologous.

In the great class of molluscs, though the parts in distinct species
can be shown to be homologous, only a few serial homologies; such as
the valves of Chitons, can be indicated; that is, we are seldom enabled
to say that one part is homologous with another part in the same
individual. And we can understand this fact; for in molluscs, even in
the lowest members of the class, we do not find nearly so much
indefinite repetition of any one part as we find in the other great
classes of the animal and vegetable kingdoms.

But morphology is a much more complex subject than it at first appears,
as has lately been well shown in a remarkable paper by Mr. E. Ray
Lankester, who has drawn an important distinction between certain
classes of cases which have all been equally ranked by naturalists as
homologous. He proposes to call the structures which resemble each
other in distinct animals, owing to their descent from a common
progenitor with subsequent modification, _homogenous;_ and the
resemblances which cannot thus be accounted for, he proposes to call
_homoplastic_. For instance, he believes that the hearts of birds and
mammals are as a whole homogenous—that is, have been derived from a
common progenitor; but that the four cavities of the heart in the two
classes are homoplastic—that is, have been independently developed. Mr.
Lankester also adduces the close resemblance of the parts on the right
and left sides of the body, and in the successive segments of the same
individual animal; and here we have parts commonly called homologous
which bear no relation to the descent of distinct species from a common
progenitor. Homoplastic structures are the same with those which I have
classed, though in a very imperfect manner, as analogous modifications
or resemblances. Their formation may be attributed in part to distinct
organisms, or to distinct parts of the same organism, having varied in
an analogous manner; and in part to similar modifications, having been
preserved for the same general purpose or function, of which many
instances have been given.

Naturalists frequently speak of the skull as formed of metamorphosed
vertebræ; the jaws of crabs as metamorphosed legs; the stamens and
pistils in flowers as metamorphosed leaves; but it would in most cases
be more correct, as Professor Huxley has remarked, to speak of both
skull and vertebræ, jaws and legs, &c., as having been metamorphosed,
not one from the other, as they now exist, but from some common and
simpler element. Most naturalists, however, use such language only in a
metaphorical sense: they are far from meaning that during a long course
of descent, primordial organs of any kind—vertebræ in the one case and
legs in the other—have actually been converted into skulls or jaws. Yet
so strong is the appearance of this having occurred that naturalists
can hardly avoid employing language having this plain signification.
According to the views here maintained, such language may be used
literally; and the wonderful fact of the jaws, for instance, of a crab
retaining numerous characters, which they probably would have retained
through inheritance, if they had really been metamorphosed from true
though extremely simple legs, is in part explained.

_Development and Embryology._

This is one of the most important subjects in the whole round of
natural history. The metamorphoses of insects, with which every one is
familiar, are generally effected abruptly by a few stages; but the
transformations are in reality numerous and gradual, though concealed.
A certain ephemerous insect (Chlöeon) during its development, moults,
as shown by Sir J. Lubbock, above twenty times, and each time undergoes
a certain amount of change; and in this case we see the act of
metamorphosis performed in a primary and gradual manner. Many insects,
and especially certain crustaceans, show us what wonderful changes of
structure can be effected during development. Such changes, however,
reach their acme in the so-called alternate generations of some of the
lower animals. It is, for instance, an astonishing fact that a delicate
branching coralline, studded with polypi, and attached to a submarine
rock, should produce, first by budding and then by transverse division,
a host of huge floating jelly-fishes; and that these should produce
eggs, from which are hatched swimming animalcules, which attach
themselves to rocks and become developed into branching corallines; and
so on in an endless cycle. The belief in the essential identity of the
process of alternate generation and of ordinary metamorphosis has been
greatly strengthened by Wagner’s discovery of the larva or maggot of a
fly, namely the Cecidomyia, producing asexually other larvæ, and these
others, which finally are developed into mature males and females,
propagating their kind in the ordinary manner by eggs.

It may be worth notice that when Wagner’s remarkable discovery was
first announced, I was asked how was it possible to account for the
larvæ of this fly having acquired the power of a sexual reproduction.
As long as the case remained unique no answer could be given. But
already Grimm has shown that another fly, a Chironomus, reproduces
itself in nearly the same manner, and he believes that this occurs
frequently in the order. It is the pupa, and not the larva, of the
Chironomus which has this power; and Grimm further shows that this
case, to a certain extent, “unites that of the Cecidomyia with the
parthenogenesis of the Coccidæ;” the term parthenogenesis implying that
the mature females of the Coccidæ are capable of producing fertile eggs
without the concourse of the male. Certain animals belonging to several
classes are now known to have the power of ordinary reproduction at an
unusually early age; and we have only to accelerate parthenogenetic
reproduction by gradual steps to an earlier and earlier age—Chironomus
showing us an almost exactly intermediate stage, viz., that of the
pupa—and we can perhaps account for the marvellous case of the
Cecidomyia.

It has already been stated that various parts in the same individual,
which are exactly alike during an early embryonic period, become widely
different and serve for widely different purposes in the adult state.
So again it has been shown that generally the embryos of the most
distinct species belonging to the same class are closely similar, but
become, when fully developed, widely dissimilar. A better proof of this
latter fact cannot be given than the statement by Von Baer that “the
embryos of mammalia, of birds, lizards and snakes, probably also of
chelonia, are in the earliest states exceedingly like one another, both
as a whole and in the mode of development of their parts; so much so,
in fact, that we can often distinguish the embryos only by their size.
In my possession are two little embryos in spirit, whose names I have
omitted to attach, and at present I am quite unable to say to what
class they belong. They may be lizards or small birds, or very young
mammalia, so complete is the similarity in the mode of formation of the
head and trunk in these animals. The extremities, however, are still
absent in these embryos. But even if they had existed in the earliest
stage of their development we should learn nothing, for the feet of
lizards and mammals, the wings and feet of birds, no less than the
hands and feet of man, all arise from the same fundamental form.” The
larvæ of most crustaceans, at corresponding stages of development,
closely resemble each other, however different the adults may become;
and so it is with very many other animals. A trace of the law of
embryonic resemblance occasionally lasts till a rather late age: thus
birds of the same genus, and of allied genera, often resemble each
other in their immature plumage; as we see in the spotted feathers in
the young of the thrush group. In the cat tribe, most of the species
when adult are striped or spotted in lines; and stripes or spots can be
plainly distinguished in the whelp of the lion and the puma. We
occasionally, though rarely, see something of the same kind in plants;
thus the first leaves of the ulex or furze, and the first leaves of the
phyllodineous acacias, are pinnate or divided like the ordinary leaves
of the leguminosæ.

The points of structure, in which the embryos of widely different
animals within the same class resemble each other, often have no direct
relation to their conditions of existence. We cannot, for instance,
suppose that in the embryos of the vertebrata the peculiar loop-like
courses of the arteries near the branchial slits are related to similar
conditions—in the young mammal which is nourished in the womb of its
mother, in the egg of the bird which is hatched in a nest, and in the
spawn of a frog under water. We have no more reason to believe in such
a relation than we have to believe that the similar bones in the hand
of a man, wing of a bat, and fin of a porpoise, are related to similar
conditions of life. No one supposes that the stripes on the whelp of a
lion, or the spots on the young blackbird, are of any use to these
animals.

The case, however, is different when an animal, during any part of its
embryonic career, is active, and has to provide for itself. The period
of activity may come on earlier or later in life; but whenever it comes
on, the adaptation of the larva to its conditions of life is just as
perfect and as beautiful as in the adult animal. In how important a
manner this has acted, has recently been well shown by Sir J. Lubbock
in his remarks on the close similarity of the larvæ of some insects
belonging to very different orders, and on the dissimilarity of the
larvæ of other insects within the same order, according to their habits
of life. Owing to such adaptations the similarity of the larvæ of
allied animals is sometimes greatly obscured; especially when there is
a division of labour during the different stages of development, as
when the same larva has during one stage to search for food, and during
another stage has to search for a place of attachment. Cases can even
be given of the larvæ of allied species, or groups of species,
differing more from each other than do the adults. In most cases,
however, the larvæ, though active, still obey, more or less closely,
the law of common embryonic resemblance. Cirripedes afford a good
instance of this: even the illustrious Cuvier did not perceive that a
barnacle was a crustacean: but a glance at the larva shows this in an
unmistakable manner. So again the two main divisions of cirripedes, the
pedunculated and sessile, though differing widely in external
appearance, have larvæ in all their stages barely distinguishable.

The embryo in the course of development generally rises in
organisation. I use this expression, though I am aware that it is
hardly possible to define clearly what is meant by organisation being
higher or lower. But no one probably will dispute that the butterfly is
higher than the caterpillar. In some cases, however, the mature animal
must be considered as lower in the scale than the larva, as with
certain parasitic crustaceans. To refer once again to cirripedes: the
larvæ in the first stage have three pairs of locomotive organs, a
simple single eye, and a probosciformed mouth, with which they feed
largely, for they increase much in size. In the second stage, answering
to the chrysalis stage of butterflies, they have six pairs of
beautifully constructed natatory legs, a pair of magnificent compound
eyes, and extremely complex antennæ; but they have a closed and
imperfect mouth, and cannot feed: their function at this stage is, to
search out by their well-developed organs of sense, and to reach by
their active powers of swimming, a proper place on which to become
attached and to undergo their final metamorphosis. When this is
completed they are fixed for life: their legs are now converted into
prehensile organs; they again obtain a well-constructed mouth; but they
have no antennæ, and their two eyes are now reconverted into a minute,
single, simple eye-spot. In this last and complete state, cirripedes
may be considered as either more highly or more lowly organised than
they were in the larval condition. But in some genera the larvæ become
developed into hermaphrodites having the ordinary structure, or into
what I have called complemental males; and in the latter the
development has assuredly been retrograde; for the male is a mere sack,
which lives for a short time and is destitute of mouth, stomach, and
every other organ of importance, excepting those for reproduction.

We are so much accustomed to see a difference in structure between the
embryo and the adult, that we are tempted to look at this difference as
in some necessary manner contingent on growth. But there is no reason
why, for instance, the wing of a bat, or the fin of a porpoise, should
not have been sketched out with all their parts in proper proportion,
as soon as any part became visible. In some whole groups of animals and
in certain members of other groups this is the case, and the embryo
does not at any period differ widely from the adult: thus Owen has
remarked in regard to cuttle-fish, “there is no metamorphosis; the
cephalopodic character is manifested long before the parts of the
embryo are completed.” Land-shells and fresh-water crustaceans are born
having their proper forms, while the marine members of the same two
great classes pass through considerable and often great changes during
their development. Spiders, again, barely undergo any metamorphosis.
The larvæ of most insects pass through a worm-like stage, whether they
are active and adapted to diversified habits, or are inactive from
being placed in the midst of proper nutriment, or from being fed by
their parents; but in some few cases, as in that of Aphis, if we look
to the admirable drawings of the development of this insect, by
Professor Huxley, we see hardly any trace of the vermiform stage.

Sometimes it is only the earlier developmental stages which fail. Thus,
Fritz Müller has made the remarkable discovery that certain shrimp-like
crustaceans (allied to Penoeus) first appear under the simple
nauplius-form, and after passing through two or more zoëa-stages, and
then through the mysis-stage, finally acquire their mature structure:
now in the whole great malacostracan order, to which these crustaceans
belong, no other member is as yet known to be first developed under the
nauplius-form, though many appear as zoëas; nevertheless Müller assigns
reasons for his belief, that if there had been no suppression of
development, all these crustaceans would have appeared as nauplii.

How, then, can we explain these several facts in embryology—namely, the
very general, though not universal, difference in structure between the
embryo and the adult; the various parts in the same individual embryo,
which ultimately become very unlike, and serve for diverse purposes,
being at an early period of growth alike; the common, but not
invariable, resemblance between the embryos or larvæ of the most
distinct species in the same class; the embryo often retaining, while
within the egg or womb, structures which are of no service to it,
either at that or at a later period of life; on the other hand, larvæ
which have to provide for their own wants, being perfectly adapted to
the surrounding conditions; and lastly, the fact of certain larvæ
standing higher in the scale of organisation than the mature animal
into which they are developed? I believe that all these facts can be
explained as follows.

It is commonly assumed, perhaps from monstrosities affecting the embryo
at a very early period, that slight variations or individual
differences necessarily appear at an equally early period. We have
little evidence on this head, but what we have certainly points the
other way; for it is notorious that breeders of cattle, horses and
various fancy animals, cannot positively tell, until some time after
birth, what will be the merits and demerits of their young animals. We
see this plainly in our own children; we cannot tell whether a child
will be tall or short, or what its precise features will be. The
question is not, at what period of life any variation may have been
caused, but at what period the effects are displayed. The cause may
have acted, and I believe often has acted, on one or both parents
before the act of generation. It deserves notice that it is of no
importance to a very young animal, as long as it is nourished and
protected by its parent, whether most of its characters are acquired a
little earlier or later in life. It would not signify, for instance, to
a bird which obtained its food by having a much-curved beak whether or
not while young it possessed a beak of this shape, as long as it was
fed by its parents.

I have stated in the first chapter, that at whatever age any variation
first appears in the parent, it tends to reappear at a corresponding
age in the offspring. Certain variations can only appear at
corresponding ages; for instance, peculiarities in the caterpillar,
cocoon, or imago states of the silk-moth; or, again, in the full-grown
horns of cattle. But variations which, for all that we can see might
have appeared either earlier or later in life, likewise tend to
reappear at a corresponding age in the offspring and parent. I am far
from meaning that this is invariably the case, and I could give several
exceptional cases of variations (taking the word in the largest sense)
which have supervened at an earlier age in the child than in the
parent.

These two principles, namely, that slight variations generally appear
at a not very early period of life, and are inherited at a
corresponding not early period, explain, as I believe, all the above
specified leading facts in embryology. But first let us look to a few
analogous cases in our domestic varieties. Some authors who have
written on Dogs maintain that the greyhound and bull-dog, though so
different, are really closely allied varieties, descended from the same
wild stock, hence I was curious to see how far their puppies differed
from each other. I was told by breeders that they differed just as much
as their parents, and this, judging by the eye, seemed almost to be the
case; but on actually measuring the old dogs and their six-days-old
puppies, I found that the puppies had not acquired nearly their full
amount of proportional difference. So, again, I was told that the foals
of cart and race-horses—breeds which have been almost wholly formed by
selection under domestication—differed as much as the full-grown
animals; but having had careful measurements made of the dams and of
three-days-old colts of race and heavy cart-horses, I find that this is
by no means the case.

As we have conclusive evidence that the breeds of the Pigeon are
descended from a single wild species, I compared the young pigeons
within twelve hours after being hatched. I carefully measured the
proportions (but will not here give the details) of the beak, width of
mouth, length of nostril and of eyelid, size of feet and length of leg,
in the wild parent species, in pouters, fantails, runts, barbs,
dragons, carriers, and tumblers. Now, some of these birds, when mature,
differ in so extraordinary a manner in the length and form of beak, and
in other characters, that they would certainly have been ranked as
distinct genera if found in a state of nature. But when the nestling
birds of these several breeds were placed in a row, though most of them
could just be distinguished, the proportional differences in the above
specified points were incomparably less than in the full-grown birds.
Some characteristic points of difference—for instance, that of the
width of mouth—could hardly be detected in the young. But there was one
remarkable exception to this rule, for the young of the short-faced
tumbler differed from the young of the wild rock-pigeon, and of the
other breeds, in almost exactly the same proportions as in the adult
stage.

These facts are explained by the above two principles. Fanciers select
their dogs, horses, pigeons, &c., for breeding, when nearly grown up.
They are indifferent whether the desired qualities are acquired earlier
or later in life, if the full-grown animal possesses them. And the
cases just given, more especially that of the pigeons, show that the
characteristic differences which have been accumulated by man’s
selection, and which give value to his breeds, do not generally appear
at a very early period of life, and are inherited at a corresponding
not early period. But the case of the short-faced tumbler, which when
twelve hours old possessed its proper characters, proves that this is
not the universal rule; for here the characteristic differences must
either have appeared at an earlier period than usual, or, if not so,
the differences must have been inherited, not at a corresponding, but
at an earlier age.

Now, let us apply these two principles to species in a state of nature.
Let us take a group of birds, descended from some ancient form and
modified through natural selection for different habits. Then, from the
many slight successive variations having supervened in the several
species at a not early age, and having been inherited at a
corresponding age, the young will have been but little modified, and
they will still resemble each other much more closely than do the
adults, just as we have seen with the breeds of the pigeon. We may
extend this view to widely distinct structures and to whole classes.
The fore-limbs, for instance, which once served as legs to a remote
progenitor, may have become, through a long course of modification,
adapted in one descendant to act as hands, in another as paddles, in
another as wings; but on the above two principles the fore-limbs will
not have been much modified in the embryos of these several forms;
although in each form the fore-limb will differ greatly in the adult
state. Whatever influence long continued use or disuse may have had in
modifying the limbs or other parts of any species, this will chiefly or
solely have affected it when nearly mature, when it was compelled to
use its full powers to gain its own living; and the effects thus
produced will have been transmitted to the offspring at a corresponding
nearly mature age. Thus the young will not be modified, or will be
modified only in a slight degree, through the effects of the increased
use or disuse of parts.

With some animals the successive variations may have supervened at a
very early period of life, or the steps may have been inherited at an
earlier age than that at which they first occurred. In either of these
cases the young or embryo will closely resemble the mature parent-form,
as we have seen with the short-faced tumbler. And this is the rule of
development in certain whole groups, or in certain sub-groups alone, as
with cuttle-fish, land-shells, fresh-water crustaceans, spiders, and
some members of the great class of insects. With respect to the final
cause of the young in such groups not passing through any
metamorphosis, we can see that this would follow from the following
contingencies: namely, from the young having to provide at a very early
age for their own wants, and from their following the same habits of
life with their parents; for in this case it would be indispensable for
their existence that they should be modified in the same manner as
their parents. Again, with respect to the singular fact that many
terrestrial and fresh-water animals do not undergo any metamorphosis,
while marine members of the same groups pass through various
transformations, Fritz Müller has suggested that the process of slowly
modifying and adapting an animal to live on the land or in fresh water,
instead of in the sea, would be greatly simplified by its not passing
through any larval stage; for it is not probable that places well
adapted for both the larval and mature stages, under such new and
greatly changed habits of life, would commonly be found unoccupied or
ill-occupied by other organisms. In this case the gradual acquirement
at an earlier and earlier age of the adult structure would be favoured
by natural selection; and all traces of former metamorphoses would
finally be lost.

If, on the other hand, it profited the young of an animal to follow
habits of life slightly different from those of the parent-form, and
consequently to be constructed on a slightly different plan, or if it
profited a larva already different from its parent to change still
further, then, on the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages,
the young or the larvæ might be rendered by natural selection more and
more different from their parents to any conceivable extent.
Differences in the larva might, also, become correlated with successive
stages of its development; so that the larva, in the first stage, might
come to differ greatly from the larva in the second stage, as is the
case with many animals. The adult might also become fitted for sites or
habits, in which organs of locomotion or of the senses, &c., would be
useless; and in this case the metamorphosis would be retrograde.

From the remarks just made we can see how by changes of structure in
the young, in conformity with changed habits of life, together with
inheritance at corresponding ages, animals might come to pass through
stages of development, perfectly distinct from the primordial condition
of their adult progenitors. Most of our best authorities are now
convinced that the various larval and pupal stages of insects have thus
been acquired through adaptation, and not through inheritance from some
ancient form. The curious case of Sitaris—a beetle which passes through
certain unusual stages of development—will illustrate how this might
occur. The first larval form is described by M. Fabre, as an active,
minute insect, furnished with six legs, two long antennæ, and four
eyes. These larvæ are hatched in the nests of bees; and when the male
bees emerge from their burrows, in the spring, which they do before the
females, the larvæ spring on them, and afterwards crawl on to the
females while paired with the males. As soon as the female bee deposits
her eggs on the surface of the honey stored in the cells, the larvæ of
the Sitaris leap on the eggs and devour them. Afterwards they undergo a
complete change; their eyes disappear; their legs and antennæ become
rudimentary, and they feed on honey; so that they now more closely
resemble the ordinary larvæ of insects; ultimately they undergo a
further transformation, and finally emerge as the perfect beetle. Now,
if an insect, undergoing transformations like those of the Sitaris,
were to become the progenitor of a whole new class of insects, the
course of development of the new class would be widely different from
that of our existing insects; and the first larval stage certainly
would not represent the former condition of any adult and ancient form.

On the other hand it is highly probable that with many animals the
embryonic or larval stages show us, more or less completely, the
condition of the progenitor of the whole group in its adult state. In
the great class of the Crustacea, forms wonderfully distinct from each
other, namely, suctorial parasites, cirripedes, entomostraca, and even
the malacostraca, appear at first as larvæ under the nauplius-form; and
as these larvæ live and feed in the open sea, and are not adapted for
any peculiar habits of life, and from other reasons assigned by Fritz
Müller, it is probable that at some very remote period an independent
adult animal, resembling the Nauplius, existed, and subsequently
produced, along several divergent lines of descent, the above-named
great Crustacean groups. So again, it is probable, from what we know of
the embryos of mammals, birds, fishes and reptiles, that these animals
are the modified descendants of some ancient progenitor, which was
furnished in its adult state with branchiæ, a swim-bladder, four
fin-like limbs, and a long tail, all fitted for an aquatic life.

As all the organic beings, extinct and recent, which have ever lived,
can be arranged within a few great classes; and as all within each
class have, according to our theory, been connected together by fine
gradations, the best, and, if our collections were nearly perfect, the
only possible arrangement, would be genealogical; descent being the
hidden bond of connexion which naturalists have been seeking under the
term of the Natural System. On this view we can understand how it is
that, in the eyes of most naturalists, the structure of the embryo is
even more important for classification than that of the adult. In two
or more groups of animals, however much they may differ from each other
in structure and habits in their adult condition, if they pass through
closely similar embryonic stages, we may feel assured that they are all
descended from one parent-form, and are therefore closely related.
Thus, community in embryonic structure reveals community of descent;
but dissimilarity in embryonic development does not prove discommunity
of descent, for in one of two groups the developmental stages may have
been suppressed, or may have been so greatly modified through
adaptation to new habits of life as to be no longer recognisable. Even
in groups, in which the adults have been modified to an extreme degree,
community of origin is often revealed by the structure of the larvæ; we
have seen, for instance, that cirripedes, though externally so like
shell-fish, are at once known by their larvæ to belong to the great
class of crustaceans. As the embryo often shows us more or less plainly
the structure of the less modified and ancient progenitor of the group,
we can see why ancient and extinct forms so often resemble in their
adult state the embryos of existing species of the same class. Agassiz
believes this to be a universal law of nature; and we may hope
hereafter to see the law proved true. It can, however, be proved true
only in those cases in which the ancient state of the progenitor of the
group has not been wholly obliterated, either by successive variations
having supervened at a very early period of growth, or by such
variations having been inherited at an earlier age than that at which
they first appeared. It should also be borne in mind, that the law may
be true, but yet, owing to the geological record not extending far
enough back in time, may remain for a long period, or for ever,
incapable of demonstration. The law will not strictly hold good in
those cases in which an ancient form became adapted in its larval state
to some special line of life, and transmitted the same larval state to
a whole group of descendants; for such larval state will not resemble
any still more ancient form in its adult state.

Thus, as it seems to me, the leading facts in embryology, which are
second to none in importance, are explained on the principle of
variations in the many descendants from some one ancient progenitor,
having appeared at a not very early period of life, and having been
inherited at a corresponding period. Embryology rises greatly in
interest, when we look at the embryo as a picture, more or less
obscured, of the progenitor, either in its adult or larval state, of
all the members of the same great class.

_Rudimentary, Atrophied, and Aborted Organs._

Organs or parts in this strange condition, bearing the plain stamp of
inutility, are extremely common, or even general, throughout nature. It
would be impossible to name one of the higher animals in which some
part or other is not in a rudimentary condition. In the mammalia, for
instance, the males possess rudimentary mammæ; in snakes one lobe of
the lungs is rudimentary; in birds the “bastard-wing” may safely be
considered as a rudimentary digit, and in some species the whole wing
is so far rudimentary that it cannot be used for flight. What can be
more curious than the presence of teeth in foetal whales, which when
grown up have not a tooth in their heads; or the teeth, which never cut
through the gums, in the upper jaws of unborn calves?

Rudimentary organs plainly declare their origin and meaning in various
ways. There are beetles belonging to closely allied species, or even to
the same identical species, which have either full-sized and perfect
wings, or mere rudiments of membrane, which not rarely lie under
wing-covers firmly soldered together; and in these cases it is
impossible to doubt, that the rudiments represent wings. Rudimentary
organs sometimes retain their potentiality: this occasionally occurs
with the mammæ of male mammals, which have been known to become well
developed and to secrete milk. So again in the udders of the genus Bos,
there are normally four developed and two rudimentary teats; but the
latter in our domestic cows sometimes become well developed and yield
milk. In regard to plants, the petals are sometimes rudimentary, and
sometimes well developed in the individuals of the same species. In
certain plants having separated sexes Kölreuter found that by crossing
a species, in which the male flowers included a rudiment of a pistil,
with an hermaphrodite species, having of course a well-developed
pistil, the rudiment in the hybrid offspring was much increased in
size; and this clearly shows that the rudimentary and perfect pistils
are essentially alike in nature. An animal may possess various parts in
a perfect state, and yet they may in one sense be rudimentary, for they
are useless: thus the tadpole of the common salamander or water-newt,
as Mr. G.H. Lewes remarks, “has gills, and passes its existence in the
water; but the Salamandra atra, which lives high up among the
mountains, brings forth its young full-formed. This animal never lives
in the water. Yet if we open a gravid female, we find tadpoles inside
her with exquisitely feathered gills; and when placed in water they
swim about like the tadpoles of the water-newt. Obviously this aquatic
organisation has no reference to the future life of the animal, nor has
it any adaptation to its embryonic condition; it has solely reference
to ancestral adaptations, it repeats a phase in the development of its
progenitors.”

An organ, serving for two purposes, may become rudimentary or utterly
aborted for one, even the more important purpose, and remain perfectly
efficient for the other. Thus, in plants, the office of the pistil is
to allow the pollen-tubes to reach the ovules within the ovarium. The
pistil consists of a stigma supported on the style; but in some
Compositæ, the male florets, which of course cannot be fecundated, have
a rudimentary pistil, for it is not crowned with a stigma; but the
style remains well developed and is clothed in the usual manner with
hairs, which serve to brush the pollen out of the surrounding and
conjoined anthers. Again, an organ may become rudimentary for its
proper purpose, and be used for a distinct one: in certain fishes the
swim-bladder seems to be rudimentary for its proper function of giving
buoyancy, but has become converted into a nascent breathing organ or
lung. Many similar instances could be given.

Useful organs, however little they may be developed, unless we have
reason to suppose that they were formerly more highly developed, ought
not to be considered as rudimentary. They may be in a nascent
condition, and in progress towards further development. Rudimentary
organs, on the other hand, are either quite useless, such as teeth
which never cut through the gums, or almost useless, such as the wings
of an ostrich, which serve merely as sails. As organs in this condition
would formerly, when still less developed, have been of even less use
than at present, they cannot formerly have been produced through
variation and natural selection, which acts solely by the preservation
of useful modifications. They have been partially retained by the power
of inheritance, and relate to a former state of things. It is, however,
often difficult to distinguish between rudimentary and nascent organs;
for we can judge only by analogy whether a part is capable of further
development, in which case alone it deserves to be called nascent.
Organs in this condition will always be somewhat rare; for beings thus
provided will commonly have been supplanted by their successors with
the same organ in a more perfect state, and consequently will have
become long ago extinct. The wing of the penguin is of high service,
acting as a fin; it may, therefore, represent the nascent state of the
wing: not that I believe this to be the case; it is more probably a
reduced organ, modified for a new function: the wing of the Apteryx, on
the other hand, is quite useless, and is truly rudimentary. Owen
considers the simple filamentary limbs of the Lepidosiren as the
“beginnings of organs which attain full functional development in
higher vertebrates;” but, according to the view lately advocated by Dr.
Günther, they are probably remnants, consisting of the persistent axis
of a fin, with the lateral rays or branches aborted. The mammary glands
of the Ornithorhynchus may be considered, in comparison with the udders
of a cow, as in a nascent condition. The ovigerous frena of certain
cirripedes, which have ceased to give attachment to the ova and are
feebly developed, are nascent branchiæ.

Rudimentary organs in the individuals of the same species are very
liable to vary in the degree of their development and in other
respects. In closely allied species, also, the extent to which the same
organ has been reduced occasionally differs much. This latter fact is
well exemplified in the state of the wings of female moths belonging to
the same family. Rudimentary organs may be utterly aborted; and this
implies, that in certain animals or plants, parts are entirely absent
which analogy would lead us to expect to find in them, and which are
occasionally found in monstrous individuals. Thus in most of the
Scrophulariaceæ the fifth stamen is utterly aborted; yet we may
conclude that a fifth stamen once existed, for a rudiment of it is
found in many species of the family, and this rudiment occasionally
becomes perfectly developed, as may sometimes be seen in the common
snap-dragon. In tracing the homologies of any part in different members
of the same class, nothing is more common, or, in order fully to
understand the relations of the parts, more useful than the discovery
of rudiments. This is well shown in the drawings given by Owen of the
leg bones of the horse, ox, and rhinoceros.

It is an important fact that rudimentary organs, such as teeth in the
upper jaws of whales and ruminants, can often be detected in the
embryo, but afterwards wholly disappear. It is also, I believe, a
universal rule, that a rudimentary part is of greater size in the
embryo relatively to the adjoining parts, than in the adult; so that
the organ at this early age is less rudimentary, or even cannot be said
to be in any degree rudimentary. Hence rudimentary organs in the adult
are often said to have retained their embryonic condition.

I have now given the leading facts with respect to rudimentary organs.
In reflecting on them, every one must be struck with astonishment; for
the same reasoning power which tells us that most parts and organs are
exquisitely adapted for certain purposes, tells us with equal plainness
that these rudimentary or atrophied organs are imperfect and useless.
In works on natural history, rudimentary organs are generally said to
have been created “for the sake of symmetry,” or in order “to complete
the scheme of nature.” But this is not an explanation, merely a
restatement of the fact. Nor is it consistent with itself: thus the
boa-constrictor has rudiments of hind limbs and of a pelvis, and if it
be said that these bones have been retained “to complete the scheme of
nature,” why, as Professor Weismann asks, have they not been retained
by other snakes, which do not possess even a vestige of these same
bones? What would be thought of an astronomer who maintained that the
satellites revolve in elliptic courses round their planets “for the
sake of symmetry,” because the planets thus revolve round the sun? An
eminent physiologist accounts for the presence of rudimentary organs,
by supposing that they serve to excrete matter in excess, or matter
injurious to the system; but can we suppose that the minute papilla,
which often represents the pistil in male flowers, and which is formed
of mere cellular tissue, can thus act? Can we suppose that rudimentary
teeth, which are subsequently absorbed, are beneficial to the rapidly
growing embryonic calf by removing matter so precious as phosphate of
lime? When a man’s fingers have been amputated, imperfect nails have
been known to appear on the stumps, and I could as soon believe that
these vestiges of nails are developed in order to excrete horny matter,
as that the rudimentary nails on the fin of the manatee have been
developed for this same purpose.

On the view of descent with modification, the origin of rudimentary
organs is comparatively simple; and we can understand to a large extent
the laws governing their imperfect development. We have plenty of cases
of rudimentary organs in our domestic productions, as the stump of a
tail in tailless breeds, the vestige of an ear in earless breeds of
sheep—the reappearance of minute dangling horns in hornless breeds of
cattle, more especially, according to Youatt, in young animals—and the
state of the whole flower in the cauliflower. We often see rudiments of
various parts in monsters; but I doubt whether any of these cases throw
light on the origin of rudimentary organs in a state of nature, further
than by showing that rudiments can be produced; for the balance of
evidence clearly indicates that species under nature do not undergo
great and abrupt changes. But we learn from the study of our domestic
productions that the disuse of parts leads to their reduced size; and
that the result is inherited.

It appears probable that disuse has been the main agent in rendering
organs rudimentary. It would at first lead by slow steps to the more
and more complete reduction of a part, until at last it became
rudimentary—as in the case of the eyes of animals inhabiting dark
caverns, and of the wings of birds inhabiting oceanic islands, which
have seldom been forced by beasts of prey to take flight, and have
ultimately lost the power of flying. Again, an organ, useful under
certain conditions, might become injurious under others, as with the
wings of beetles living on small and exposed islands; and in this case
natural selection will have aided in reducing the organ, until it was
rendered harmless and rudimentary.

Any change in structure and function, which can be effected by small
stages, is within the power of natural selection; so that an organ
rendered, through changed habits of life, useless or injurious for one
purpose, might be modified and used for another purpose. An organ
might, also, be retained for one alone of its former functions. Organs,
originally formed by the aid of natural selection, when rendered
useless may well be variable, for their variations can no longer be
checked by natural selection. All this agrees well with what we see
under nature. Moreover, at whatever period of life either disuse or
selection reduces an organ, and this will generally be when the being
has come to maturity and to exert its full powers of action, the
principle of inheritance at corresponding ages will tend to reproduce
the organ in its reduced state at the same mature age, but will seldom
affect it in the embryo. Thus we can understand the greater size of
rudimentary organs in the embryo relatively to the adjoining parts, and
their lesser relative size in the adult. If, for instance, the digit of
an adult animal was used less and less during many generations, owing
to some change of habits, or if an organ or gland was less and less
functionally exercised, we may infer that it would become reduced in
size in the adult descendants of this animal, but would retain nearly
its original standard of development in the embryo.

There remains, however, this difficulty. After an organ has ceased
being used, and has become in consequence much reduced, how can it be
still further reduced in size until the merest vestige is left; and how
can it be finally quite obliterated? It is scarcely possible that
disuse can go on producing any further effect after the organ has once
been rendered functionless. Some additional explanation is here
requisite which I cannot give. If, for instance, it could be proved
that every part of the organisation tends to vary in a greater degree
towards diminution than toward augmentation of size, then we should be
able to understand how an organ which has become useless would be
rendered, independently of the effects of disuse, rudimentary and would
at last be wholly suppressed; for the variations towards diminished
size would no longer be checked by natural selection. The principle of
the economy of growth, explained in a former chapter, by which the
materials forming any part, if not useful to the possessor, are saved
as far as is possible, will perhaps come into play in rendering a
useless part rudimentary. But this principle will almost necessarily be
confined to the earlier stages of the process of reduction; for we
cannot suppose that a minute papilla, for instance, representing in a
male flower the pistil of the female flower, and formed merely of
cellular tissue, could be further reduced or absorbed for the sake of
economising nutriment.

Finally, as rudimentary organs, by whatever steps they may have been
degraded into their present useless condition, are the record of a
former state of things, and have been retained solely through the power
of inheritance—we can understand, on the genealogical view of
classification, how it is that systematists, in placing organisms in
their proper places in the natural system, have often found rudimentary
parts as useful as, or even sometimes more useful than, parts of high
physiological importance. Rudimentary organs may be compared with the
letters in a word, still retained in the spelling, but become useless
in the pronunciation, but which serve as a clue for its derivation. On
the view of descent with modification, we may conclude that the
existence of organs in a rudimentary, imperfect, and useless condition,
or quite aborted, far from presenting a strange difficulty, as they
assuredly do on the old doctrine of creation, might even have been
anticipated in accordance with the views here explained.

_Summary._

In this chapter I have attempted to show that the arrangement of all
organic beings throughout all time in groups under groups—that the
nature of the relationships by which all living and extinct organisms
are united by complex, radiating, and circuitous lines of affinities
into a few grand classes—the rules followed and the difficulties
encountered by naturalists in their classifications—the value set upon
characters, if constant and prevalent, whether of high or of the most
trifling importance, or, as with rudimentary organs of no
importance—the wide opposition in value between analogical or adaptive
characters, and characters of true affinity; and other such rules—all
naturally follow if we admit the common parentage of allied forms,
together with their modification through variation and natural
selection, with the contingencies of extinction and divergence of
character. In considering this view of classification, it should be
borne in mind that the element of descent has been universally used in
ranking together the sexes, ages, dimorphic forms, and acknowledged
varieties of the same species, however much they may differ from each
other in structure. If we extend the use of this element of descent—the
one certainly known cause of similarity in organic beings—we shall
understand what is meant by the Natural System: it is genealogical in
its attempted arrangement, with the grades of acquired difference
marked by the terms, varieties, species, genera, families, orders, and
classes.

On this same view of descent with modification, most of the great facts
in Morphology become intelligible—whether we look to the same pattern
displayed by the different species of the same class in their
homologous organs, to whatever purpose applied, or to the serial and
lateral homologies in each individual animal and plant.

On the principle of successive slight variations, not necessarily or
generally supervening at a very early period of life, and being
inherited at a corresponding period, we can understand the leading
facts in embryology; namely, the close resemblance in the individual
embryo of the parts which are homologous, and which when matured become
widely different in structure and function; and the resemblance of the
homologous parts or organs in allied though distinct species, though
fitted in the adult state for habits as different as is possible. Larvæ
are active embryos, which have become specially modified in a greater
or less degree in relation to their habits of life, with their
modifications inherited at a corresponding early age. On these same
principles, and bearing in mind that when organs are reduced in size,
either from disuse or through natural selection, it will generally be
at that period of life when the being has to provide for its own wants,
and bearing in mind how strong is the force of inheritance—the
occurrence of rudimentary organs might even have been anticipated. The
importance of embryological characters and of rudimentary organs in
classification is intelligible, on the view that a natural arrangement
must be genealogical.

Finally, the several classes of facts which have been considered in
this chapter, seem to me to proclaim so plainly, that the innumerable
species, genera and families, with which this world is peopled, are all
descended, each within its own class or group, from common parents, and
have all been modified in the course of descent, that I should without
hesitation adopt this view, even if it were unsupported by other facts
or arguments.

CHAPTER XV.
RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION.

Recapitulation of the objections to the theory of Natural
Selection—Recapitulation of the general and special circumstances in
its favour—Causes of the general belief in the immutability of
species—How far the theory of Natural Selection may be extended—Effects
of its adoption on the study of Natural History—Concluding remarks.

As this whole volume is one long argument, it may be convenient to the
reader to have the leading facts and inferences briefly recapitulated.

That many and serious objections may be advanced against the theory of
descent with modification through variation and natural selection, I do
not deny. I have endeavoured to give to them their full force. Nothing
at first can appear more difficult to believe than that the more
complex organs and instincts have been perfected, not by means superior
to, though analogous with, human reason, but by the accumulation of
innumerable slight variations, each good for the individual possessor.
Nevertheless, this difficulty, though appearing to our imagination
insuperably great, cannot be considered real if we admit the following
propositions, namely, that all parts of the organisation and instincts
offer, at least individual differences—that there is a struggle for
existence leading to the preservation of profitable deviations of
structure or instinct—and, lastly, that gradations in the state of
perfection of each organ may have existed, each good of its kind. The
truth of these propositions cannot, I think, be disputed.

It is, no doubt, extremely difficult even to conjecture by what
gradations many structures have been perfected, more especially among
broken and failing groups of organic beings, which have suffered much
extinction; but we see so many strange gradations in nature, that we
ought to be extremely cautious in saying that any organ or instinct, or
any whole structure, could not have arrived at its present state by
many graduated steps. There are, it must be admitted, cases of special
difficulty opposed to the theory of natural selection; and one of the
most curious of these is the existence in the same community of two or
three defined castes of workers or sterile female ants; but I have
attempted to show how these difficulties can be mastered.

With respect to the almost universal sterility of species when first
crossed, which forms so remarkable a contrast with the almost universal
fertility of varieties when crossed, I must refer the reader to the
recapitulation of the facts given at the end of the ninth chapter,
which seem to me conclusively to show that this sterility is no more a
special endowment than is the incapacity of two distinct kinds of trees
to be grafted together; but that it is incidental on differences
confined to the reproductive systems of the intercrossed species. We
see the truth of this conclusion in the vast difference in the results
of crossing the same two species reciprocally—that is, when one species
is first used as the father and then as the mother. Analogy from the
consideration of dimorphic and trimorphic plants clearly leads to the
same conclusion, for when the forms are illegitimately united, they
yield few or no seed, and their offspring are more or less sterile; and
these forms belong to the same undoubted species, and differ from each
other in no respect except in their reproductive organs and functions.

Although the fertility of varieties when intercrossed, and of their
mongrel offspring, has been asserted by so many authors to be
universal, this cannot be considered as quite correct after the facts
given on the high authority of Gärtner and Kölreuter. Most of the
varieties which have been experimented on have been produced under
domestication; and as domestication (I do not mean mere confinement)
almost certainly tends to eliminate that sterility which, judging from
analogy, would have affected the parent-species if intercrossed, we
ought not to expect that domestication would likewise induce sterility
in their modified descendants when crossed. This elimination of
sterility apparently follows from the same cause which allows our
domestic animals to breed freely under diversified circumstances; and
this again apparently follows from their having been gradually
accustomed to frequent changes in their conditions of life.

A double and parallel series of facts seems to throw much light on the
sterility of species, when first crossed, and of their hybrid
offspring. On the one side, there is good reason to believe that slight
changes in the conditions of life give vigour and fertility to all
organic beings. We know also that a cross between the distinct
individuals of the same variety, and between distinct varieties,
increases the number of their offspring, and certainly gives to them
increased size and vigour. This is chiefly owing to the forms which are
crossed having been exposed to somewhat different conditions of life;
for I have ascertained by a labourious series of experiments that if
all the individuals of the same variety be subjected during several
generations to the same conditions, the good derived from crossing is
often much diminished or wholly disappears. This is one side of the
case. On the other side, we know that species which have long been
exposed to nearly uniform conditions, when they are subjected under
confinement to new and greatly changed conditions, either perish, or if
they survive, are rendered sterile, though retaining perfect health.
This does not occur, or only in a very slight degree, with our
domesticated productions, which have long been exposed to fluctuating
conditions. Hence when we find that hybrids produced by a cross between
two distinct species are few in number, owing to their perishing soon
after conception or at a very early age, or if surviving that they are
rendered more or less sterile, it seems highly probable that this
result is due to their having been in fact subjected to a great change
in their conditions of life, from being compounded of two distinct
organisations. He who will explain in a definite manner why, for
instance, an elephant or a fox will not breed under confinement in its
native country, whilst the domestic pig or dog will breed freely under
the most diversified conditions, will at the same time be able to give
a definite answer to the question why two distinct species, when
crossed, as well as their hybrid offspring, are generally rendered more
or less sterile, while two domesticated varieties when crossed and
their mongrel offspring are perfectly fertile.

Turning to geographical distribution, the difficulties encountered on
the theory of descent with modification are serious enough. All the
individuals of the same species, and all the species of the same genus,
or even higher group, are descended from common parents; and therefore,
in however distant and isolated parts of the world they may now be
found, they must in the course of successive generations have travelled
from some one point to all the others. We are often wholly unable even
to conjecture how this could have been effected. Yet, as we have reason
to believe that some species have retained the same specific form for
very long periods of time, immensely long as measured by years, too
much stress ought not to be laid on the occasional wide diffusion of
the same species; for during very long periods there will always have
been a good chance for wide migration by many means. A broken or
interrupted range may often be accounted for by the extinction of the
species in the intermediate regions. It cannot be denied that we are as
yet very ignorant as to the full extent of the various climatical and
geographical changes which have affected the earth during modern
periods; and such changes will often have facilitated migration. As an
example, I have attempted to show how potent has been the influence of
the Glacial period on the distribution of the same and of allied
species throughout the world. We are as yet profoundly ignorant of the
many occasional means of transport. With respect to distinct species of
the same genus, inhabiting distant and isolated regions, as the process
of modification has necessarily been slow, all the means of migration
will have been possible during a very long period; and consequently the
difficulty of the wide diffusion of the species of the same genus is in
some degree lessened.

As according to the theory of natural selection an interminable number
of intermediate forms must have existed, linking together all the
species in each group by gradations as fine as our existing varieties,
it may be asked, Why do we not see these linking forms all around us?
Why are not all organic beings blended together in an inextricable
chaos? With respect to existing forms, we should remember that we have
no right to expect (excepting in rare cases) to discover _directly_
connecting links between them, but only between each and some extinct
and supplanted form. Even on a wide area, which has during a long
period remained continuous, and of which the climatic and other
conditions of life change insensibly in proceeding from a district
occupied by one species into another district occupied by a closely
allied species, we have no just right to expect often to find
intermediate varieties in the intermediate zones. For we have reason to
believe that only a few species of a genus ever undergo change; the
other species becoming utterly extinct and leaving no modified progeny.
Of the species which do change, only a few within the same country
change at the same time; and all modifications are slowly effected. I
have also shown that the intermediate varieties which probably at first
existed in the intermediate zones, would be liable to be supplanted by
the allied forms on either hand; for the latter, from existing in
greater numbers, would generally be modified and improved at a quicker
rate than the intermediate varieties, which existed in lesser numbers;
so that the intermediate varieties would, in the long run, be
supplanted and exterminated.

On this doctrine of the extermination of an infinitude of connecting
links, between the living and extinct inhabitants of the world, and at
each successive period between the extinct and still older species, why
is not every geological formation charged with such links? Why does not
every collection of fossil remains afford plain evidence of the
gradation and mutation of the forms of life? Although geological
research has undoubtedly revealed the former existence of many links,
bringing numerous forms of life much closer together, it does not yield
the infinitely many fine gradations between past and present species
required on the theory, and this is the most obvious of the many
objections which may be urged against it. Why, again, do whole groups
of allied species appear, though this appearance is often false, to
have come in suddenly on the successive geological stages? Although we
now know that organic beings appeared on this globe, at a period
incalculably remote, long before the lowest bed of the Cambrian system
was deposited, why do we not find beneath this system great piles of
strata stored with the remains of the progenitors of the Cambrian
fossils? For on the theory, such strata must somewhere have been
deposited at these ancient and utterly unknown epochs of the world’s
history.

I can answer these questions and objections only on the supposition
that the geological record is far more imperfect than most geologists
believe. The number of specimens in all our museums is absolutely as
nothing compared with the countless generations of countless species
which have certainly existed. The parent form of any two or more
species would not be in all its characters directly intermediate
between its modified offspring, any more than the rock-pigeon is
directly intermediate in crop and tail between its descendants, the
pouter and fantail pigeons. We should not be able to recognise a
species as the parent of another and modified species, if we were to
examine the two ever so closely, unless we possessed most of the
intermediate links; and owing to the imperfection of the geological
record, we have no just right to expect to find so many links. If two
or three, or even more linking forms were discovered, they would simply
be ranked by many naturalists as so many new species, more especially
if found in different geological substages, let their differences be
ever so slight. Numerous existing doubtful forms could be named which
are probably varieties; but who will pretend that in future ages so
many fossil links will be discovered, that naturalists will be able to
decide whether or not these doubtful forms ought to be called
varieties? Only a small portion of the world has been geologically
explored. Only organic beings of certain classes can be preserved in a
fossil condition, at least in any great number. Many species when once
formed never undergo any further change but become extinct without
leaving modified descendants; and the periods during which species have
undergone modification, though long as measured by years, have probably
been short in comparison with the periods during which they retained
the same form. It is the dominant and widely ranging species which vary
most frequently and vary most, and varieties are often at first
local—both causes rendering the discovery of intermediate links in any
one formation less likely. Local varieties will not spread into other
and distant regions until they are considerably modified and improved;
and when they have spread, and are discovered in a geological
formation, they appear as if suddenly created there, and will be simply
classed as new species. Most formations have been intermittent in their
accumulation; and their duration has probably been shorter than the
average duration of specific forms. Successive formations are in most
cases separated from each other by blank intervals of time of great
length, for fossiliferous formations thick enough to resist future
degradation can, as a general rule, be accumulated only where much
sediment is deposited on the subsiding bed of the sea. During the
alternate periods of elevation and of stationary level the record will
generally be blank. During these latter periods there will probably be
more variability in the forms of life; during periods of subsidence,
more extinction.

With respect to the absence of strata rich in fossils beneath the
Cambrian formation, I can recur only to the hypothesis given in the
tenth chapter; namely, that though our continents and oceans have
endured for an enormous period in nearly their present relative
positions, we have no reason to assume that this has always been the
case; consequently formations much older than any now known may lie
buried beneath the great oceans. With respect to the lapse of time not
having been sufficient since our planet was consolidated for the
assumed amount of organic change, and this objection, as urged by Sir
William Thompson, is probably one of the gravest as yet advanced, I can
only say, firstly, that we do not know at what rate species change, as
measured by years, and secondly, that many philosophers are not as yet
willing to admit that we know enough of the constitution of the
universe and of the interior of our globe to speculate with safety on
its past duration.

That the geological record is imperfect all will admit; but that it is
imperfect to the degree required by our theory, few will be inclined to
admit. If we look to long enough intervals of time, geology plainly
declares that species have all changed; and they have changed in the
manner required by the theory, for they have changed slowly and in a
graduated manner. We clearly see this in the fossil remains from
consecutive formations invariably being much more closely related to
each other than are the fossils from widely separated formations.

Such is the sum of the several chief objections and difficulties which
may justly be urged against the theory; and I have now briefly
recapitulated the answers and explanations which, as far as I can see,
may be given. I have felt these difficulties far too heavily during
many years to doubt their weight. But it deserves especial notice that
the more important objections relate to questions on which we are
confessedly ignorant; nor do we know how ignorant we are. We do not
know all the possible transitional gradations between the simplest and
the most perfect organs; it cannot be pretended that we know all the
varied means of Distribution during the long lapse of years, or that we
know how imperfect is the Geological Record. Serious as these several
objections are, in my judgment they are by no means sufficient to
overthrow the theory of descent with subsequent modification.

Now let us turn to the other side of the argument. Under domestication
we see much variability, caused, or at least excited, by changed
conditions of life; but often in so obscure a manner, that we are
tempted to consider the variations as spontaneous. Variability is
governed by many complex laws, by correlated growth, compensation, the
increased use and disuse of parts, and the definite action of the
surrounding conditions. There is much difficulty in ascertaining how
largely our domestic productions have been modified; but we may safely
infer that the amount has been large, and that modifications can be
inherited for long periods. As long as the conditions of life remain
the same, we have reason to believe that a modification, which has
already been inherited for many generations, may continue to be
inherited for an almost infinite number of generations. On the other
hand we have evidence that variability, when it has once come into
play, does not cease under domestication for a very long period; nor do
we know that it ever ceases, for new varieties are still occasionally
produced by our oldest domesticated productions.

Variability is not actually caused by man; he only unintentionally
exposes organic beings to new conditions of life and then nature acts
on the organisation and causes it to vary. But man can and does select
the variations given to him by nature, and thus accumulates them in any
desired manner. He thus adapts animals and plants for his own benefit
or pleasure. He may do this methodically, or he may do it unconsciously
by preserving the individuals most useful or pleasing to him without
any intention of altering the breed. It is certain that he can largely
influence the character of a breed by selecting, in each successive
generation, individual differences so slight as to be inappreciable
except by an educated eye. This unconscious process of selection has
been the great agency in the formation of the most distinct and useful
domestic breeds. That many breeds produced by man have to a large
extent the character of natural species, is shown by the inextricable
doubts whether many of them are varieties or aboriginally distinct
species.

There is no reason why the principles which have acted so efficiently
under domestication should not have acted under nature. In the survival
of favoured individuals and races, during the constantly recurrent
Struggle for Existence, we see a powerful and ever-acting form of
Selection. The struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high
geometrical ratio of increase which is common to all organic beings.
This high rate of increase is proved by calculation—by the rapid
increase of many animals and plants during a succession of peculiar
seasons, and when naturalised in new countries. More individuals are
born than can possibly survive. A grain in the balance may determine
which individuals shall live and which shall die—which variety or
species shall increase in number, and which shall decrease, or finally
become extinct. As the individuals of the same species come in all
respects into the closest competition with each other, the struggle
will generally be most severe between them; it will be almost equally
severe between the varieties of the same species, and next in severity
between the species of the same genus. On the other hand the struggle
will often be severe between beings remote in the scale of nature. The
slightest advantage in certain individuals, at any age or during any
season, over those with which they come into competition, or better
adaptation in however slight a degree to the surrounding physical
conditions, will, in the long run, turn the balance.

With animals having separated sexes, there will be in most cases a
struggle between the males for the possession of the females. The most
vigorous males, or those which have most successfully struggled with
their conditions of life, will generally leave most progeny. But
success will often depend on the males having special weapons or means
of defence or charms; and a slight advantage will lead to victory.

As geology plainly proclaims that each land has undergone great
physical changes, we might have expected to find that organic beings
have varied under nature, in the same way as they have varied under
domestication. And if there has been any variability under nature, it
would be an unaccountable fact if natural selection had not come into
play. It has often been asserted, but the assertion is incapable of
proof, that the amount of variation under nature is a strictly limited
quantity. Man, though acting on external characters alone and often
capriciously, can produce within a short period a great result by
adding up mere individual differences in his domestic productions; and
every one admits that species present individual differences. But,
besides such differences, all naturalists admit that natural varieties
exist, which are considered sufficiently distinct to be worthy of
record in systematic works. No one has drawn any clear distinction
between individual differences and slight varieties; or between more
plainly marked varieties and subspecies and species. On separate
continents, and on different parts of the same continent, when divided
by barriers of any kind, and on outlying islands, what a multitude of
forms exist, which some experienced naturalists rank as varieties,
others as geographical races or sub species, and others as distinct,
though closely allied species!

If, then, animals and plants do vary, let it be ever so slightly or
slowly, why should not variations or individual differences, which are
in any way beneficial, be preserved and accumulated through natural
selection, or the survival of the fittest? If man can by patience
select variations useful to him, why, under changing and complex
conditions of life, should not variations useful to nature’s living
products often arise, and be preserved or selected? What limit can be
put to this power, acting during long ages and rigidly scrutinising the
whole constitution, structure, and habits of each creature, favouring
the good and rejecting the bad? I can see no limit to this power, in
slowly and beautifully adapting each form to the most complex relations
of life. The theory of natural selection, even if we look no further
than this, seems to be in the highest degree probable. I have already
recapitulated, as fairly as I could, the opposed difficulties and
objections: now let us turn to the special facts and arguments in
favour of the theory.

On the view that species are only strongly marked and permanent
varieties, and that each species first existed as a variety, we can see
why it is that no line of demarcation can be drawn between species,
commonly supposed to have been produced by special acts of creation,
and varieties which are acknowledged to have been produced by secondary
laws. On this same view we can understand how it is that in a region
where many species of a genus have been produced, and where they now
flourish, these same species should present many varieties; for where
the manufactory of species has been active, we might expect, as a
general rule, to find it still in action; and this is the case if
varieties be incipient species. Moreover, the species of the larger
genera, which afford the greater number of varieties or incipient
species, retain to a certain degree the character of varieties; for
they differ from each other by a less amount of difference than do the
species of smaller genera. The closely allied species also of a larger
genera apparently have restricted ranges, and in their affinities they
are clustered in little groups round other species—in both respects
resembling varieties. These are strange relations on the view that each
species was independently created, but are intelligible if each existed
first as a variety.

As each species tends by its geometrical rate of reproduction to
increase inordinately in number; and as the modified descendants of
each species will be enabled to increase by as much as they become more
diversified in habits and structure, so as to be able to seize on many
and widely different places in the economy of nature, there will be a
constant tendency in natural selection to preserve the most divergent
offspring of any one species. Hence during a long-continued course of
modification, the slight differences characteristic of varieties of the
same species, tend to be augmented into the greater differences
characteristic of the species of the same genus. New and improved
varieties will inevitably supplant and exterminate the older, less
improved and intermediate varieties; and thus species are rendered to a
large extent defined and distinct objects. Dominant species belonging
to the larger groups within each class tend to give birth to new and
dominant forms; so that each large group tends to become still larger,
and at the same time more divergent in character. But as all groups
cannot thus go on increasing in size, for the world would not hold
them, the more dominant groups beat the less dominant. This tendency in
the large groups to go on increasing in size and diverging in
character, together with the inevitable contingency of much extinction,
explains the arrangement of all the forms of life in groups subordinate
to groups, all within a few great classes, which has prevailed
throughout all time. This grand fact of the grouping of all organic
beings under what is called the Natural System, is utterly inexplicable
on the theory of creation.

As natural selection acts solely by accumulating slight, successive,
favourable variations, it can produce no great or sudden modifications;
it can act only by short and slow steps. Hence, the canon of “Natura
non facit saltum,” which every fresh addition to our knowledge tends to
confirm, is on this theory intelligible. We can see why throughout
nature the same general end is gained by an almost infinite diversity
of means, for every peculiarity when once acquired is long inherited,
and structures already modified in many different ways have to be
adapted for the same general purpose. We can, in short, see why nature
is prodigal in variety, though niggard in innovation. But why this
should be a law of nature if each species has been independently
created no man can explain.

Many other facts are, as it seems to me, explicable on this theory. How
strange it is that a bird, under the form of a woodpecker, should prey
on insects on the ground; that upland geese, which rarely or never
swim, would possess webbed feet; that a thrush-like bird should dive
and feed on sub-aquatic insects; and that a petrel should have the
habits and structure fitting it for the life of an auk! and so in
endless other cases. But on the view of each species constantly trying
to increase in number, with natural selection always ready to adapt the
slowly varying descendants of each to any unoccupied or ill-occupied
place in nature, these facts cease to be strange, or might even have
been anticipated.

We can to a certain extent understand how it is that there is so much
beauty throughout nature; for this may be largely attributed to the
agency of selection. That beauty, according to our sense of it, is not
universal, must be admitted by every one who will look at some venomous
snakes, at some fishes, and at certain hideous bats with a distorted
resemblance to the human face. Sexual selection has given the most
brilliant colours, elegant patterns, and other ornaments to the males,
and sometimes to both sexes of many birds, butterflies and other
animals. With birds it has often rendered the voice of the male musical
to the female, as well as to our ears. Flowers and fruit have been
rendered conspicuous by brilliant colours in contrast with the green
foliage, in order that the flowers may be easily seen, visited and
fertilised by insects, and the seeds disseminated by birds. How it
comes that certain colours, sounds and forms should give pleasure to
man and the lower animals, that is, how the sense of beauty in its
simplest form was first acquired, we do not know any more than how
certain odours and flavours were first rendered agreeable.

As natural selection acts by competition, it adapts and improves the
inhabitants of each country only in relation to their co-inhabitants;
so that we need feel no surprise at the species of any one country,
although on the ordinary view supposed to have been created and
specially adapted for that country, being beaten and supplanted by the
naturalised productions from another land. Nor ought we to marvel if
all the contrivances in nature be not, as far as we can judge,
absolutely perfect; as in the case even of the human eye; or if some of
them be abhorrent to our ideas of fitness. We need not marvel at the
sting of the bee, when used against the enemy, causing the bee’s own
death; at drones being produced in such great numbers for one single
act, and being then slaughtered by their sterile sisters; at the
astonishing waste of pollen by our fir-trees; at the instinctive hatred
of the queen-bee for her own fertile daughters; at ichneumonidæ feeding
within the living bodies of caterpillars; and at other such cases. The
wonder, indeed, is, on the theory of natural selection, that more cases
of the want of absolute perfection have not been detected.

The complex and little known laws governing the production of varieties
are the same, as far as we can judge, with the laws which have governed
the production of distinct species. In both cases physical conditions
seem to have produced some direct and definite effect, but how much we
cannot say. Thus, when varieties enter any new station, they
occasionally assume some of the characters proper to the species of
that station. With both varieties and species, use and disuse seem to
have produced a considerable effect; for it is impossible to resist
this conclusion when we look, for instance, at the logger-headed duck,
which has wings incapable of flight, in nearly the same condition as in
the domestic duck; or when we look at the burrowing tucu-tucu, which is
occasionally blind, and then at certain moles, which are habitually
blind and have their eyes covered with skin; or when we look at the
blind animals inhabiting the dark caves of America and Europe. With
varieties and species, correlated variation seems to have played an
important part, so that when one part has been modified other parts
have been necessarily modified. With both varieties and species,
reversions to long-lost characters occasionally occur. How inexplicable
on the theory of creation is the occasional appearance of stripes on
the shoulders and legs of the several species of the horse-genus and of
their hybrids! How simply is this fact explained if we believe that
these species are all descended from a striped progenitor, in the same
manner as the several domestic breeds of the pigeon are descended from
the blue and barred rock-pigeon!

On the ordinary view of each species having been independently created,
why should specific characters, or those by which the species of the
same genus differ from each other, be more variable than the generic
characters in which they all agree? Why, for instance, should the
colour of a flower be more likely to vary in any one species of a
genus, if the other species possess differently coloured flowers, than
if all possessed the same coloured flowers? If species are only
well-marked varieties, of which the characters have become in a high
degree permanent, we can understand this fact; for they have already
varied since they branched off from a common progenitor in certain
characters, by which they have come to be specifically distinct from
each other; therefore these same characters would be more likely again
to vary than the generic characters which have been inherited without
change for an immense period. It is inexplicable on the theory of
creation why a part developed in a very unusual manner in one species
alone of a genus, and therefore, as we may naturally infer, of great
importance to that species, should be eminently liable to variation;
but, on our view, this part has undergone, since the several species
branched off from a common progenitor, an unusual amount of variability
and modification, and therefore we might expect the part generally to
be still variable. But a part may be developed in the most unusual
manner, like the wing of a bat, and yet not be more variable than any
other structure, if the part be common to many subordinate forms, that
is, if it has been inherited for a very long period; for in this case
it will have been rendered constant by long-continued natural
selection.

Glancing at instincts, marvellous as some are, they offer no greater
difficulty than do corporeal structures on the theory of the natural
selection of successive, slight, but profitable modifications. We can
thus understand why nature moves by graduated steps in endowing
different animals of the same class with their several instincts. I
have attempted to show how much light the principle of gradation throws
on the admirable architectural powers of the hive-bee. Habit no doubt
often comes into play in modifying instincts; but it certainly is not
indispensable, as we see in the case of neuter insects, which leave no
progeny to inherit the effects of long-continued habit. On the view of
all the species of the same genus having descended from a common
parent, and having inherited much in common, we can understand how it
is that allied species, when placed under widely different conditions
of life, yet follow nearly the same instincts; why the thrushes of
tropical and temperate South America, for instance, line their nests
with mud like our British species. On the view of instincts having been
slowly acquired through natural selection, we need not marvel at some
instincts being not perfect and liable to mistakes, and at many
instincts causing other animals to suffer.

If species be only well-marked and permanent varieties, we can at once
see why their crossed offspring should follow the same complex laws in
their degrees and kinds of resemblance to their parents—in being
absorbed into each other by successive crosses, and in other such
points—as do the crossed offspring of acknowledged varieties. This
similarity would be a strange fact, if species had been independently
created and varieties had been produced through secondary laws.

If we admit that the geological record is imperfect to an extreme
degree, then the facts, which the record does give, strongly support
the theory of descent with modification. New species have come on the
stage slowly and at successive intervals; and the amount of change
after equal intervals of time, is widely different in different groups.
The extinction of species and of whole groups of species, which has
played so conspicuous a part in the history of the organic world,
almost inevitably follows from the principle of natural selection; for
old forms are supplanted by new and improved forms. Neither single
species nor groups of species reappear when the chain of ordinary
generation is once broken. The gradual diffusion of dominant forms,
with the slow modification of their descendants, causes the forms of
life, after long intervals of time, to appear as if they had changed
simultaneously throughout the world. The fact of the fossil remains of
each formation being in some degree intermediate in character between
the fossils in the formations above and below, is simply explained by
their intermediate position in the chain of descent. The grand fact
that all extinct beings can be classed with all recent beings,
naturally follows from the living and the extinct being the offspring
of common parents. As species have generally diverged in character
during their long course of descent and modification, we can understand
why it is that the more ancient forms, or early progenitors of each
group, so often occupy a position in some degree intermediate between
existing groups. Recent forms are generally looked upon as being, on
the whole, higher in the scale of organisation than ancient forms; and
they must be higher, in so far as the later and more improved forms
have conquered the older and less improved forms in the struggle for
life; they have also generally had their organs more specialised for
different functions. This fact is perfectly compatible with numerous
beings still retaining simple and but little improved structures,
fitted for simple conditions of life; it is likewise compatible with
some forms having retrograded in organisation, by having become at each
stage of descent better fitted for new and degraded habits of life.
Lastly, the wonderful law of the long endurance of allied forms on the
same continent—of marsupials in Australia, of edentata in America, and
other such cases—is intelligible, for within the same country the
existing and the extinct will be closely allied by descent.

Looking to geographical distribution, if we admit that there has been
during the long course of ages much migration from one part of the
world to another, owing to former climatical and geographical changes
and to the many occasional and unknown means of dispersal, then we can
understand, on the theory of descent with modification, most of the
great leading facts in Distribution. We can see why there should be so
striking a parallelism in the distribution of organic beings throughout
space, and in their geological succession throughout time; for in both
cases the beings have been connected by the bond of ordinary
generation, and the means of modification have been the same. We see
the full meaning of the wonderful fact, which has struck every
traveller, namely, that on the same continent, under the most diverse
conditions, under heat and cold, on mountain and lowland, on deserts
and marshes, most of the inhabitants within each great class are
plainly related; for they are the descendants of the same progenitors
and early colonists. On this same principle of former migration,
combined in most cases with modification, we can understand, by the aid
of the Glacial period, the identity of some few plants, and the close
alliance of many others, on the most distant mountains, and in the
northern and southern temperate zones; and likewise the close alliance
of some of the inhabitants of the sea in the northern and southern
temperate latitudes, though separated by the whole intertropical ocean.
Although two countries may present physical conditions as closely
similar as the same species ever require, we need feel no surprise at
their inhabitants being widely different, if they have been for a long
period completely sundered from each other; for as the relation of
organism to organism is the most important of all relations, and as the
two countries will have received colonists at various periods and in
different proportions, from some other country or from each other, the
course of modification in the two areas will inevitably have been
different.

On this view of migration, with subsequent modification, we see why
oceanic islands are inhabited by only few species, but of these, why
many are peculiar or endemic forms. We clearly see why species
belonging to those groups of animals which cannot cross wide spaces of
the ocean, as frogs and terrestrial mammals, do not inhabit oceanic
islands; and why, on the other hand, new and peculiar species of bats,
animals which can traverse the ocean, are often found on islands far
distant from any continent. Such cases as the presence of peculiar
species of bats on oceanic islands and the absence of all other
terrestrial mammals, are facts utterly inexplicable on the theory of
independent acts of creation.

The existence of closely allied representative species in any two
areas, implies, on the theory of descent with modification, that the
same parent-forms formerly inhabited both areas; and we almost
invariably find that wherever many closely allied species inhabit two
areas, some identical species are still common to both. Wherever many
closely allied yet distinct species occur, doubtful forms and varieties
belonging to the same groups likewise occur. It is a rule of high
generality that the inhabitants of each area are related to the
inhabitants of the nearest source whence immigrants might have been
derived. We see this in the striking relation of nearly all the plants
and animals of the Galapagos Archipelago, of Juan Fernandez, and of the
other American islands, to the plants and animals of the neighbouring
American mainland; and of those of the Cape de Verde Archipelago, and
of the other African islands to the African mainland. It must be
admitted that these facts receive no explanation on the theory of
creation.

The fact, as we have seen, that all past and present organic beings can
be arranged within a few great classes, in groups subordinate to
groups, and with the extinct groups often falling in between the recent
groups, is intelligible on the theory of natural selection with its
contingencies of extinction and divergence of character. On these same
principles we see how it is that the mutual affinities of the forms
within each class are so complex and circuitous. We see why certain
characters are far more serviceable than others for classification; why
adaptive characters, though of paramount importance to the beings, are
of hardly any importance in classification; why characters derived from
rudimentary parts, though of no service to the beings, are often of
high classificatory value; and why embryological characters are often
the most valuable of all. The real affinities of all organic beings, in
contradistinction to their adaptive resemblances, are due to
inheritance or community of descent. The Natural System is a
genealogical arrangement, with the acquired grades of difference,
marked by the terms, varieties, species, genera, families, &c.; and we
have to discover the lines of descent by the most permanent characters,
whatever they may be, and of however slight vital importance.

The similar framework of bones in the hand of a man, wing of a bat, fin
of the porpoise, and leg of the horse—the same number of vertebræ
forming the neck of the giraffe and of the elephant—and innumerable
other such facts, at once explain themselves on the theory of descent
with slow and slight successive modifications. The similarity of
pattern in the wing and in the leg of a bat, though used for such
different purpose—in the jaws and legs of a crab—in the petals,
stamens, and pistils of a flower, is likewise, to a large extent,
intelligible on the view of the gradual modification of parts or
organs, which were aboriginally alike in an early progenitor in each of
these classes. On the principle of successive variations not always
supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding not
early period of life, we clearly see why the embryos of mammals, birds,
reptiles, and fishes should be so closely similar, and so unlike the
adult forms. We may cease marvelling at the embryo of an air-breathing
mammal or bird having branchial slits and arteries running in loops,
like those of a fish which has to breathe the air dissolved in water by
the aid of well-developed branchiæ.

Disuse, aided sometimes by natural selection, will often have reduced
organs when rendered useless under changed habits or conditions of
life; and we can understand on this view the meaning of rudimentary
organs. But disuse and selection will generally act on each creature,
when it has come to maturity and has to play its full part in the
struggle for existence, and will thus have little power on an organ
during early life; hence the organ will not be reduced or rendered
rudimentary at this early age. The calf, for instance, has inherited
teeth, which never cut through the gums of the upper jaw, from an early
progenitor having well-developed teeth; and we may believe, that the
teeth in the mature animal were formerly reduced by disuse owing to the
tongue and palate, or lips, having become excellently fitted through
natural selection to browse without their aid; whereas in the calf, the
teeth have been left unaffected, and on the principle of inheritance at
corresponding ages have been inherited from a remote period to the
present day. On the view of each organism with all its separate parts
having been specially created, how utterly inexplicable is it that
organs bearing the plain stamp of inutility, such as the teeth in the
embryonic calf or the shrivelled wings under the soldered wing-covers
of many beetles, should so frequently occur. Nature may be said to have
taken pains to reveal her scheme of modification, by means of
rudimentary organs, of embryological and homologous structures, but we
are too blind to understand her meaning.

I have now recapitulated the facts and considerations which have
thoroughly convinced me that species have been modified, during a long
course of descent. This has been effected chiefly through the natural
selection of numerous successive, slight, favourable variations; aided
in an important manner by the inherited effects of the use and disuse
of parts; and in an unimportant manner, that is, in relation to
adaptive structures, whether past or present, by the direct action of
external conditions, and by variations which seem to us in our
ignorance to arise spontaneously. It appears that I formerly underrated
the frequency and value of these latter forms of variation, as leading
to permanent modifications of structure independently of natural
selection. But as my conclusions have lately been much misrepresented,
and it has been stated that I attribute the modification of species
exclusively to natural selection, I may be permitted to remark that in
the first edition of this work, and subsequently, I placed in a most
conspicuous position—namely, at the close of the Introduction—the
following words: “I am convinced that natural selection has been the
main but not the exclusive means of modification.” This has been of no
avail. Great is the power of steady misrepresentation; but the history
of science shows that fortunately this power does not long endure.

It can hardly be supposed that a false theory would explain, in so
satisfactory a manner as does the theory of natural selection, the
several large classes of facts above specified. It has recently been
objected that this is an unsafe method of arguing; but it is a method
used in judging of the common events of life, and has often been used
by the greatest natural philosophers. The undulatory theory of light
has thus been arrived at; and the belief in the revolution of the earth
on its own axis was until lately supported by hardly any direct
evidence. It is no valid objection that science as yet throws no light
on the far higher problem of the essence or origin of life. Who can
explain what is the essence of the attraction of gravity? No one now
objects to following out the results consequent on this unknown element
of attraction; notwithstanding that Leibnitz formerly accused Newton of
introducing “occult qualities and miracles into philosophy.”

I see no good reasons why the views given in this volume should shock
the religious feelings of any one. It is satisfactory, as showing how
transient such impressions are, to remember that the greatest discovery
ever made by man, namely, the law of the attraction of gravity, was
also attacked by Leibnitz, “as subversive of natural, and inferentially
of revealed, religion.” A celebrated author and divine has written to
me that “he has gradually learned to see that it is just as noble a
conception of the Deity to believe that He created a few original forms
capable of self-development into other and needful forms, as to believe
that He required a fresh act of creation to supply the voids caused by
the action of His laws.”

Why, it may be asked, until recently did nearly all the most eminent
living naturalists and geologists disbelieve in the mutability of
species? It cannot be asserted that organic beings in a state of nature
are subject to no variation; it cannot be proved that the amount of
variation in the course of long ages is a limited quantity; no clear
distinction has been, or can be, drawn between species and well-marked
varieties. It cannot be maintained that species when intercrossed are
invariably sterile and varieties invariably fertile; or that sterility
is a special endowment and sign of creation. The belief that species
were immutable productions was almost unavoidable as long as the
history of the world was thought to be of short duration; and now that
we have acquired some idea of the lapse of time, we are too apt to
assume, without proof, that the geological record is so perfect that it
would have afforded us plain evidence of the mutation of species, if
they had undergone mutation.

But the chief cause of our natural unwillingness to admit that one
species has given birth to other and distinct species, is that we are
always slow in admitting any great changes of which we do not see the
steps. The difficulty is the same as that felt by so many geologists,
when Lyell first insisted that long lines of inland cliffs had been
formed, and great valleys excavated, by the agencies which we still see
at work. The mind cannot possibly grasp the full meaning of the term of
even a million years; it cannot add up and perceive the full effects of
many slight variations, accumulated during an almost infinite number of
generations.

Although I am fully convinced of the truth of the views given in this
volume under the form of an abstract, I by no means expect to convince
experienced naturalists whose minds are stocked with a multitude of
facts all viewed, during a long course of years, from a point of view
directly opposite to mine. It is so easy to hide our ignorance under
such expressions as the “plan of creation,” “unity of design,” &c., and
to think that we give an explanation when we only restate a fact. Any
one whose disposition leads him to attach more weight to unexplained
difficulties than to the explanation of a certain number of facts will
certainly reject the theory. A few naturalists, endowed with much
flexibility of mind, and who have already begun to doubt the
immutability of species, may be influenced by this volume; but I look
with confidence to the future, to young and rising naturalists, who
will be able to view both sides of the question with impartiality.
Whoever is led to believe that species are mutable will do good service
by conscientiously expressing his conviction; for thus only can the
load of prejudice by which this subject is overwhelmed be removed.

Several eminent naturalists have of late published their belief that a
multitude of reputed species in each genus are not real species; but
that other species are real, that is, have been independently created.
This seems to me a strange conclusion to arrive at. They admit that a
multitude of forms, which till lately they themselves thought were
special creations, and which are still thus looked at by the majority
of naturalists, and which consequently have all the external
characteristic features of true species—they admit that these have been
produced by variation, but they refuse to extend the same view to other
and slightly different forms. Nevertheless, they do not pretend that
they can define, or even conjecture, which are the created forms of
life, and which are those produced by secondary laws. They admit
variation as a vera causa in one case, they arbitrarily reject it in
another, without assigning any distinction in the two cases. The day
will come when this will be given as a curious illustration of the
blindness of preconceived opinion. These authors seem no more startled
at a miraculous act of creation than at an ordinary birth. But do they
really believe that at innumerable periods in the earth’s history
certain elemental atoms have been commanded suddenly to flash into
living tissues? Do they believe that at each supposed act of creation
one individual or many were produced? Were all the infinitely numerous
kinds of animals and plants created as eggs or seed, or as full grown?
and in the case of mammals, were they created bearing the false marks
of nourishment from the mother’s womb? Undoubtedly some of these same
questions cannot be answered by those who believe in the appearance or
creation of only a few forms of life or of some one form alone. It has
been maintained by several authors that it is as easy to believe in the
creation of a million beings as of one; but Maupertuis’ philosophical
axiom “of least action” leads the mind more willingly to admit the
smaller number; and certainly we ought not to believe that innumerable
beings within each great class have been created with plain, but
deceptive, marks of descent from a single parent.

As a record of a former state of things, I have retained in the
foregoing paragraphs, and elsewhere, several sentences which imply that
naturalists believe in the separate creation of each species; and I
have been much censured for having thus expressed myself. But
undoubtedly this was the general belief when the first edition of the
present work appeared. I formerly spoke to very many naturalists on the
subject of evolution, and never once met with any sympathetic
agreement. It is probable that some did then believe in evolution, but
they were either silent or expressed themselves so ambiguously that it
was not easy to understand their meaning. Now, things are wholly
changed, and almost every naturalist admits the great principle of
evolution. There are, however, some who still think that species have
suddenly given birth, through quite unexplained means, to new and
totally different forms. But, as I have attempted to show, weighty
evidence can be opposed to the admission of great and abrupt
modifications. Under a scientific point of view, and as leading to
further investigation, but little advantage is gained by believing that
new forms are suddenly developed in an inexplicable manner from old and
widely different forms, over the old belief in the creation of species
from the dust of the earth.

It may be asked how far I extend the doctrine of the modification of
species. The question is difficult to answer, because the more distinct
the forms are which we consider, by so much the arguments in favour of
community of descent become fewer in number and less in force. But some
arguments of the greatest weight extend very far. All the members of
whole classes are connected together by a chain of affinities, and all
can be classed on the same principle, in groups subordinate to groups.
Fossil remains sometimes tend to fill up very wide intervals between
existing orders.

Organs in a rudimentary condition plainly show that an early progenitor
had the organ in a fully developed condition, and this in some cases
implies an enormous amount of modification in the descendants.
Throughout whole classes various structures are formed on the same
pattern, and at a very early age the embryos closely resemble each
other. Therefore I cannot doubt that the theory of descent with
modification embraces all the members of the same great class or
kingdom. I believe that animals are descended from at most only four or
five progenitors, and plants from an equal or lesser number.

Analogy would lead me one step further, namely, to the belief that all
animals and plants are descended from some one prototype. But analogy
may be a deceitful guide. Nevertheless all living things have much in
common, in their chemical composition, their cellular structure, their
laws of growth, and their liability to injurious influences. We see
this even in so trifling a fact as that the same poison often similarly
affects plants and animals; or that the poison secreted by the gall-fly
produces monstrous growths on the wild rose or oak-tree. With all
organic beings, excepting perhaps some of the very lowest, sexual
reproduction seems to be essentially similar. With all, as far as is at
present known, the germinal vesicle is the same; so that all organisms
start from a common origin. If we look even to the two main
divisions—namely, to the animal and vegetable kingdoms—certain low
forms are so far intermediate in character that naturalists have
disputed to which kingdom they should be referred. As Professor Asa
Gray has remarked, “the spores and other reproductive bodies of many of
the lower algæ may claim to have first a characteristically animal, and
then an unequivocally vegetable existence.” Therefore, on the principle
of natural selection with divergence of character, it does not seem
incredible that, from some such low and intermediate form, both animals
and plants may have been developed; and, if we admit this, we must
likewise admit that all the organic beings which have ever lived on
this earth may be descended from some one primordial form. But this
inference is chiefly grounded on analogy, and it is immaterial whether
or not it be accepted. No doubt it is possible, as Mr. G.H. Lewes has
urged, that at the first commencement of life many different forms were
evolved; but if so, we may conclude that only a very few have left
modified descendants. For, as I have recently remarked in regard to the
members of each great kingdom, such as the Vertebrata, Articulata, &c.,
we have distinct evidence in their embryological, homologous, and
rudimentary structures, that within each kingdom all the members are
descended from a single progenitor.

When the views advanced by me in this volume, and by Mr. Wallace or
when analogous views on the origin of species are generally admitted,
we can dimly foresee that there will be a considerable revolution in
natural history. Systematists will be able to pursue their labours as
at present; but they will not be incessantly haunted by the shadowy
doubt whether this or that form be a true species. This, I feel sure
and I speak after experience, will be no slight relief. The endless
disputes whether or not some fifty species of British brambles are good
species will cease. Systematists will have only to decide (not that
this will be easy) whether any form be sufficiently constant and
distinct from other forms, to be capable of definition; and if
definable, whether the differences be sufficiently important to deserve
a specific name. This latter point will become a far more essential
consideration than it is at present; for differences, however slight,
between any two forms, if not blended by intermediate gradations, are
looked at by most naturalists as sufficient to raise both forms to the
rank of species.

Hereafter we shall be compelled to acknowledge that the only
distinction between species and well-marked varieties is, that the
latter are known, or believed to be connected at the present day by
intermediate gradations, whereas species were formerly thus connected.
Hence, without rejecting the consideration of the present existence of
intermediate gradations between any two forms, we shall be led to weigh
more carefully and to value higher the actual amount of difference
between them. It is quite possible that forms now generally
acknowledged to be merely varieties may hereafter be thought worthy of
specific names; and in this case scientific and common language will
come into accordance. In short, we shall have to treat species in the
same manner as those naturalists treat genera, who admit that genera
are merely artificial combinations made for convenience. This may not
be a cheering prospect; but we shall at least be freed from the vain
search for the undiscovered and undiscoverable essence of the term
species.

The other and more general departments of natural history will rise
greatly in interest. The terms used by naturalists, of affinity,
relationship, community of type, paternity, morphology, adaptive
characters, rudimentary and aborted organs, &c., will cease to be
metaphorical and will have a plain signification. When we no longer
look at an organic being as a savage looks at a ship, as something
wholly beyond his comprehension; when we regard every production of
nature as one which has had a long history; when we contemplate every
complex structure and instinct as the summing up of many contrivances,
each useful to the possessor, in the same way as any great mechanical
invention is the summing up of the labour, the experience, the reason,
and even the blunders of numerous workmen; when we thus view each
organic being, how far more interesting—I speak from experience—does
the study of natural history become!

A grand and almost untrodden field of inquiry will be opened, on the
causes and laws of variation, on correlation, on the effects of use and
disuse, on the direct action of external conditions, and so forth. The
study of domestic productions will rise immensely in value. A new
variety raised by man will be a far more important and interesting
subject for study than one more species added to the infinitude of
already recorded species. Our classifications will come to be, as far
as they can be so made, genealogies; and will then truly give what may
be called the plan of creation. The rules for classifying will no doubt
become simpler when we have a definite object in view. We possess no
pedigree or armorial bearings; and we have to discover and trace the
many diverging lines of descent in our natural genealogies, by
characters of any kind which have long been inherited. Rudimentary
organs will speak infallibly with respect to the nature of long-lost
structures. Species and groups of species which are called aberrant,
and which may fancifully be called living fossils, will aid us in
forming a picture of the ancient forms of life. Embryology will often
reveal to us the structure, in some degree obscured, of the prototypes
of each great class.

When we can feel assured that all the individuals of the same species,
and all the closely allied species of most genera, have, within a not
very remote period descended from one parent, and have migrated from
some one birth-place; and when we better know the many means of
migration, then, by the light which geology now throws, and will
continue to throw, on former changes of climate and of the level of the
land, we shall surely be enabled to trace in an admirable manner the
former migrations of the inhabitants of the whole world. Even at
present, by comparing the differences between the inhabitants of the
sea on the opposite sides of a continent, and the nature of the various
inhabitants of that continent in relation to their apparent means of
immigration, some light can be thrown on ancient geography.

The noble science of geology loses glory from the extreme imperfection
of the record. The crust of the earth, with its embedded remains, must
not be looked at as a well-filled museum, but as a poor collection made
at hazard and at rare intervals. The accumulation of each great
fossiliferous formation will be recognised as having depended on an
unusual occurrence of favourable circumstances, and the blank intervals
between the successive stages as having been of vast duration. But we
shall be able to gauge with some security the duration of these
intervals by a comparison of the preceding and succeeding organic
forms. We must be cautious in attempting to correlate as strictly
contemporaneous two formations, which do not include many identical
species, by the general succession of the forms of life. As species are
produced and exterminated by slowly acting and still existing causes,
and not by miraculous acts of creation; and as the most important of
all causes of organic change is one which is almost independent of
altered and perhaps suddenly altered physical conditions, namely, the
mutual relation of organism to organism—the improvement of one organism
entailing the improvement or the extermination of others; it follows,
that the amount of organic change in the fossils of consecutive
formations probably serves as a fair measure of the relative, though
not actual lapse of time. A number of species, however, keeping in a
body might remain for a long period unchanged, whilst within the same
period, several of these species, by migrating into new countries and
coming into competition with foreign associates, might become modified;
so that we must not overrate the accuracy of organic change as a
measure of time.

In the future I see open fields for far more important researches.
Psychology will be securely based on the foundation already well laid
by Mr. Herbert Spencer, that of the necessary acquirement of each
mental power and capacity by gradation. Much light will be thrown on
the origin of man and his history.

Authors of the highest eminence seem to be fully satisfied with the
view that each species has been independently created. To my mind it
accords better with what we know of the laws impressed on matter by the
Creator, that the production and extinction of the past and present
inhabitants of the world should have been due to secondary causes, like
those determining the birth and death of the individual. When I view
all beings not as special creations, but as the lineal descendants of
some few beings which lived long before the first bed of the Cambrian
system was deposited, they seem to me to become ennobled. Judging from
the past, we may safely infer that not one living species will transmit
its unaltered likeness to a distinct futurity. And of the species now
living very few will transmit progeny of any kind to a far distant
futurity; for the manner in which all organic beings are grouped, shows
that the greater number of species in each genus, and all the species
in many genera, have left no descendants, but have become utterly
extinct. We can so far take a prophetic glance into futurity as to
foretell that it will be the common and widely spread species,
belonging to the larger and dominant groups within each class, which
will ultimately prevail and procreate new and dominant species. As all
the living forms of life are the lineal descendants of those which
lived long before the Cambrian epoch, we may feel certain that the
ordinary succession by generation has never once been broken, and that
no cataclysm has desolated the whole world. Hence, we may look with
some confidence to a secure future of great length. And as natural
selection works solely by and for the good of each being, all corporeal
and mental endowments will tend to progress towards perfection.

It is interesting to contemplate a tangled bank, clothed with many
plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various
insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth,
and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different
from each other, and dependent upon each other in so complex a manner,
have all been produced by laws acting around us. These laws, taken in
the largest sense, being Growth with reproduction; Inheritance which is
almost implied by reproduction; Variability from the indirect and
direct action of the conditions of life, and from use and disuse; a
Ratio of Increase so high as to lead to a Struggle for Life, and as a
consequence to Natural Selection, entailing Divergence of Character and
the Extinction of less improved forms. Thus, from the war of nature,
from famine and death, the most exalted object which we are capable of
conceiving, namely, the production of the higher animals, directly
follows. There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several
powers, having been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms
or into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone circling on
according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning
endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are
being evolved.

GLOSSARY OF THE PRINCIPAL SCIENTIFIC TERMS USED IN THE PRESENT VOLUME.*

   * I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. W.S. Dallas for this
   Glossary, which has been given because several readers have
   complained to me that some of the terms used were unintelligible to
   them. Mr. Dallas has endeavoured to give the explanations of the
   terms in as popular a form as possible.

ABERRANT.—Forms or groups of animals or plants which deviate in
important characters from their nearest allies, so as not to be easily
included in the same group with them, are said to be aberrant.

ABERRATION (in Optics).—In the refraction of light by a convex lens the
rays passing through different parts of the lens are brought to a focus
at slightly different distances—this is called _spherical aberration;_
at the same time the coloured rays are separated by the prismatic
action of the lens and likewise brought to a focus at different
distances—this is _chromatic aberration_.

ABNORMAL.—Contrary to the general rule.

ABORTED.—An organ is said to be aborted, when its development has been
arrested at a very early stage.

ALBINISM.—Albinos are animals in which the usual colouring matters
characteristic of the species have not been produced in the skin and
its appendages. Albinism is the state of being an albino.

ALGÆ.—A class of plants including the ordinary sea-weeds and the
filamentous fresh-water weeds.

ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS.—This term is applied to a peculiar mode of
reproduction which prevails among many of the lower animals, in which
the egg produces a living form quite different from its parent, but
from which the parent-form is reproduced by a process of budding, or by
the division of the substance of the first product of the egg.

AMMONITES.—A group of fossil, spiral, chambered shells, allied to the
existing pearly Nautilus, but having the partitions between the
chambers waved in complicated patterns at their junction with the outer
wall of the shell.

ANALOGY.—That resemblance of structures which depends upon similarity
of function, as in the wings of insects and birds. Such structures are
said to be _analogous_, and to be _analogues_ of each other.

ANIMALCULE.—A minute animal: generally applied to those visible only by
the microscope.

ANNELIDS.—A class of worms in which the surface of the body exhibits a
more or less distinct division into rings or segments, generally
provided with appendages for locomotion and with gills. It includes the
ordinary marine worms, the earth-worms, and the leeches.

ANTENNÆ.—Jointed organs appended to the head in Insects, Crustacea and
Centipedes, and not belonging to the mouth.

ANTHERS.—The summits of the stamens of flowers, in which the pollen or
fertilising dust is produced.

APLACENTALIA, APLACENTATA or Aplacental Mammals.—See _mammalia_.

ARCHETYPAL.—Of or belonging to the Archetype, or ideal primitive form
upon which all the beings of a group seem to be organised.

ARTICULATA.—A great division of the Animal Kingdom characterised
generally by having the surface of the body divided into rings called
segments, a greater or less number of which are furnished with jointed
legs (such as Insects, Crustaceans and Centipedes).

ASYMMETRICAL.—Having the two sides unlike.

ATROPHIED.—Arrested in development at a very early stage.

BALANUS.—The genus including the common Acorn-shells which live in
abundance on the rocks of the sea-coast.

BATRACHIANS.—A class of animals allied to the Reptiles, but undergoing
a peculiar metamorphosis, in which the young animal is generally
aquatic and breathes by gills. (_Examples_, Frogs, Toads, and Newts.)

BOULDERS.—Large transported blocks of stone generally embedded in clays
or gravels.

BRACHIOPODA.—A class of marine Mollusca, or soft-bodied animals,
furnished with a bivalve shell, attached to submarine objects by a
stalk which passes through an aperture in one of the valves, and
furnished with fringed arms, by the action of which food is carried to
the mouth.

BRANCHIÆ.—Gills or organs for respiration in water.

BRANCHIAL.—Pertaining to gills or branchiæ.

CAMBRIAN SYSTEM.—A series of very ancient Palæozoic rocks, between the
Laurentian and the Silurian. Until recently these were regarded as the
oldest fossiliferous rocks.

CANIDÆ.—The Dog-family, including the Dog, Wolf, Fox, Jackal, &c.

CARAPACE.—The shell enveloping the anterior part of the body in
Crustaceans generally; applied also to the hard shelly pieces of the
Cirripedes.

CARBONIFEROUS.—This term is applied to the great formation which
includes, among other rocks, the coal-measures. It belongs to the
oldest, or Palæozoic, system of formations.

CAUDAL.—Of or belonging to the tail.

CEPHALOPODS.—The highest class of the Mollusca, or soft-bodied animals,
characterised by having the mouth surrounded by a greater or less
number of fleshy arms or tentacles, which, in most living species, are
furnished with sucking-cups. (_Examples_, Cuttle-fish, Nautilus.)

CETACEA.—An order of Mammalia, including the Whales, Dolphins, &c.,
having the form of the body fish-like, the skin naked, and only the
fore limbs developed.

CHELONIA.—An order of Reptiles including the Turtles, Tortoises, &c.

CIRRIPEDES.—An order of Crustaceans including the Barnacles and
Acorn-shells. Their young resemble those of many other Crustaceans in
form; but when mature they are always attached to other objects, either
directly or by means of a stalk, and their bodies are enclosed by a
calcareous shell composed of several pieces, two of which can open to
give issue to a bunch of curled, jointed tentacles, which represent the
limbs.

COCCUS.—The genus of Insects including the Cochineal. In these the male
is a minute, winged fly, and the female generally a motionless,
berry-like mass.

COCOON.—A case usually of silky material, in which insects are
frequently enveloped during the second or resting-stage (pupa) of their
existence. The term “cocoon-stage” is here used as equivalent to
“pupa-stage.”

CŒLOSPERMOUS.—A term applied to those fruits of the Umbelliferæ which
have the seed hollowed on the inner face.

COLEOPTERA.—Beetles, an order of Insects, having a biting mouth and the
first pair of wings more or less horny, forming sheaths for the second
pair, and usually meeting in a straight line down the middle of the
back.

COLUMN.—A peculiar organ in the flowers of Orchids, in which the
stamens, style and stigma (or the reproductive parts) are united.

COMPOSITÆ or COMPOSITOUS PLANTS.—Plants in which the inflorescence
consists of numerous small flowers (florets) brought together into a
dense head, the base of which is enclosed by a common envelope.
(_Examples_, the Daisy, Dandelion, &c.)

CONFERVÆ.—The filamentous weeds of fresh water.

CONGLOMERATE.—A rock made up of fragments of rock or pebbles, cemented
together by some other material.

COROLLA.—The second envelope of a flower usually composed of coloured,
leaf-like organs (petals), which may be united by their edges either in
the basal part or throughout.

CORRELATION.—The normal coincidence of one phenomenon, character, &c.,
with another.

CORYMB.—A bunch of flowers in which those springing from the lower part
of the flower stalks are supported on long stalks so as to be nearly on
a level with the upper ones.

COTYLEDONS.—The first or seed-leaves of plants.

CRUSTACEANS.—A class of articulated animals, having the skin of the
body generally more or less hardened by the deposition of calcareous
matter, breathing by means of gills. (_Examples_, Crab, Lobster,
Shrimp, &c.)

CURCULIO.—The old generic term for the Beetles known as Weevils,
characterised by their four-jointed feet, and by the head being
produced into a sort of beak, upon the sides of which the antennæ are
inserted.

CUTANEOUS.—Of or belonging to the skin.

DEGRADATION.—The wearing down of land by the action of the sea or of
meteoric agencies.

DENUDATION.—The wearing away of the surface of the land by water.

DEVONIAN SYSTEM or FORMATION.—A series of Palæozoic rocks, including
the Old Red Sandstone.

DICOTYLEDONS, or DICOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS.—A class of plants characterised
by having two seed-leaves, by the formation of new wood between the
bark and the old wood (exogenous growth) and by the reticulation of the
veins of the leaves. The parts of the flowers are generally in
multiples of five.

DIFFERENTATION.—The separation or discrimination of parts or organs
which in simpler forms of life are more or less united.

DIMORPHIC.—Having two distinct forms.—DIMORPHISM is the condition of
the appearance of the same species under two dissimilar forms.

DIOECIOUS.—Having the organs of the sexes upon distinct individuals.

DIORITE.—A peculiar form of Greenstone.

DORSAL.—Of or belonging to the back.

EDENTATA.—A peculiar order of Quadrupeds, characterised by the absence
of at least the middle incisor (front) teeth in both jaws. (_Examples_,
the Sloths and Armadillos.)

ELYTRA.—The hardened fore-wings of Beetles, serving as sheaths for the
membranous hind-wings, which constitute the true organs of flight.

EMBRYO.—The young animal undergoing development within the egg or womb.

EMBRYOLOGY.—The study of the development of the embryo.

ENDEMIC.—Peculiar to a given locality.

ENTOMOSTRACA.—A division of the class Crustacea, having all the
segments of the body usually distinct, gills attached to the feet or
organs of the mouth, and the feet fringed with fine hairs. They are
generally of small size.

EOCENE.—The earliest of the three divisions of the Tertiary epoch of
geologists. Rocks of this age contain a small proportion of shells
identical with species now living.

EPHEMEROUS INSECTS.—Insects allied to the May-fly.

FAUNA.—The totality of the animals naturally inhabiting a certain
country or region, or which have lived during a given geological
period.

FELIDÆ.—The Cat-family.

FERAL.—Having become wild from a state of cultivation or domestication.

FLORA.—The totality of the plants growing naturally in a country, or
during a given geological period.

FLORETS.—Flowers imperfectly developed in some respects, and collected
into a dense spike or head, as in the Grasses, the Dandelion, &c.

FOETAL.—Of or belonging to the foetus, or embryo in course of
development.

FORAMINIFERA.—A class of animals of very low organisation and generally
of small size, having a jelly-like body, from the surface of which
delicate filaments can be given off and retracted for the prehension of
external objects, and having a calcareous or sandy shell, usually
divided into chambers and perforated with small apertures.

FOSSILIFEROUS.—Containing fossils.

FOSSORIAL.—Having a faculty of digging. The Fossorial Hymenoptera are a
group of Wasp-like Insects, which burrow in sandy soil to make nests
for their young.

FRENUM (pl. FRENA).—A small band or fold of skin.

FUNGI (sing. FUNGUS).—A class of cellular plants, of which Mushrooms,
Toadstools, and Moulds, are familiar examples.

FURCULA.—The forked bone formed by the union of the collar-bones in
many birds, such as the common Fowl.

GALLINACEOUS BIRDS.—An order of birds of which the common Fowl, Turkey,
and Pheasant, are well-known examples.

GALLUS.—The genus of birds which includes the common Fowl.

GANGLION.—A swelling or knot from which nerves are given off as from a
centre.

GANOID FISHES.—Fishes covered with peculiar enamelled bony scales. Most
of them are extinct.

GERMINAL VESICLE.—A minute vesicle in the eggs of animals, from which
the development of the embryo proceeds.

GLACIAL PERIOD.—A period of great cold and of enormous extension of ice
upon the surface of the earth. It is believed that glacial periods have
occurred repeatedly during the geological history of the earth, but the
term is generally applied to the close of the Tertiary epoch, when
nearly the whole of Europe was subjected to an arctic climate.

GLAND.—An organ which secretes or separates some peculiar product from
the blood or sap of animals or plants.

GLOTTIS.—The opening of the windpipe into the œsophagus or gullet.

GNEISS.—A rock approaching granite in composition, but more or less
laminated, and really produced by the alteration of a sedimentary
deposit after its consolidation.

GRALLATORES.—The so-called wading-birds (storks, cranes, snipes, &c.),
which are generally furnished with long legs, bare of feathers above
the heel, and have no membranes between the toes.

GRANITE.—A rock consisting essentially of crystals of felspar and mica
in a mass of quartz.

HABITAT.—The locality in which a plant or animal naturally lives.

HEMIPTERA.—An order or sub-order of insects, characterised by the
possession of a jointed beak or rostrum, and by having the fore-wings
horny in the basal portion and membranous at the extremity, where they
cross each other. This group includes the various species of bugs.

HERMAPHRODITE.—Possessing the organs of both sexes.

HOMOLOGY.—That relation between parts which results from their
development from corresponding embryonic parts, either in different
animals, as in the case of the arm of man, the fore-leg of a quadruped,
and the wing of a bird; or in the same individual, as in the case of
the fore and hind legs in quadrupeds, and the segments or rings and
their appendages of which the body of a worm, a centipede, &c., is
composed. The latter is called _serial homology_. The parts which stand
in such a relation to each other are said to be _homologous_, and one
such part or organ is called the _homologue_ of the other. In different
plants the parts of the flower are homologous, and in general these
parts are regarded as homologous with leaves.

HOMOPTERA.—An order or sub-order of insects having (like the Hemiptera)
a jointed beak, but in which the fore-wings are either wholly
membranous or wholly leathery, The _Cicadæ_, frog-hoppers, and
_Aphides_, are well-known examples.

HYBRID.—The offspring of the union of two distinct species.

HYMENOPTERA.—An order of insects possessing biting jaws and usually
four membranous wings in which there are a few veins. Bees and wasps
are familiar examples of this group.

HYPERTROPHIED.—Excessively developed.

ICHNEUMONIDÆ.—A family of hymenopterous insects, the members of which
lay their eggs in the bodies or eggs of other insects.

IMAGO.—The perfect (generally winged) reproductive state of an insect.

INDIGENES.—The aboriginal animal or vegetable inhabitants of a country
or region.

INFLORESCENCE.—The mode of arrangement of the flowers of plants.

INFUSORIA.—A class of microscopic animalcules, so called from their
having originally been observed in infusions of vegetable matters. They
consist of a gelatinous material enclosed in a delicate membrane, the
whole or part of which is furnished with short vibrating hairs (called
cilia), by means of which the animalcules swim through the water or
convey the minute particles of their food to the orifice of the mouth.

INSECTIVOROUS.—Feeding on insects.

INVERTEBRATA, or INVERTEBRATE ANIMALS.—Those animals which do not
possess a backbone or spinal column.

LACUNÆ.—Spaces left among the tissues in some of the lower animals and
serving in place of vessels for the circulation of the fluids of the
body.

LAMELLATED.—Furnished with lamellæ or little plates.

LARVA (pl. LARVÆ).—The first condition of an insect at its issuing from
the egg, when it is usually in the form of a grub, caterpillar, or
maggot.

LARYNX.—The upper part of the windpipe opening into the gullet.

LAURENTIAN.—A group of greatly altered and very ancient rocks, which is
greatly developed along the course of the St. Laurence, whence the
name. It is in these that the earliest known traces of organic bodies
have been found.

LEGUMINOSÆ.—An order of plants represented by the common peas and
beans, having an irregular flower in which one petal stands up like a
wing, and the stamens and pistil are enclosed in a sheath formed by two
other petals. The fruit is a pod (or legume).

LEMURIDÆ.—A group of four-handed animals, distinct from the monkeys and
approaching the insectivorous quadrupeds in some of their characters
and habits. Its members have the nostrils curved or twisted, and a claw
instead of a nail upon the first finger of the hind hands.

LEPIDOPTERA.—An order of insects, characterised by the possession of a
spiral proboscis, and of four large more or less scaly wings. It
includes the well-known butterflies and moths.

LITTORAL.—Inhabiting the seashore.

LOESS.—A marly deposit of recent (Post-Tertiary) date, which occupies a
great part of the valley of the Rhine.

MALACOSTRACA.—The higher division of the Crustacea, including the
ordinary crabs, lobsters, shrimps, &c., together with the woodlice and
sand-hoppers.

MAMMALIA.—The highest class of animals, including the ordinary hairy
quadrupeds, the whales and man, and characterised by the production of
living young which are nourished after birth by milk from the teats
(_Mammæ_, _Mammary glands_) of the mother. A striking difference in
embryonic development has led to the division of this class into two
great groups; in one of these, when the embryo has attained a certain
stage, a vascular connection, called the _placenta_, is formed between
the embryo and the mother; in the other this is wanting, and the young
are produced in a very incomplete state. The former, including the
greater part of the class, are called _Placental Mammals;_ the latter,
or _Aplacental Mammals_, include the Marsupials and Monotremes
(_Ornithorhynchus_).

MAMMIFEROUS.—Having mammæ or teats (see MAMMALIA).

MANDIBLES.—in insects, the first or uppermost pair of jaws, which are
generally solid, horny, biting organs. In birds the term is applied to
both jaws with their horny coverings. In quadrupeds the mandible is
properly the lower jaw.

MARSUPIALS.—An order of Mammalia in which the young are born in a very
incomplete state of development, and carried by the mother, while
sucking, in a ventral pouch (marsupium), such as the kangaroos,
opossums, &c. (see MAMMALIA).

MAXILLÆ.—in insects, the second or lower pair of jaws, which are
composed of several joints and furnished with peculiar jointed
appendages called palpi, or feelers.

MELANISM.—The opposite of albinism; an undue development of colouring
material in the skin and its appendages.

METAMORPHIC ROCKS.—Sedimentary rocks which have undergone alteration,
generally by the action of heat, subsequently to their deposition and
consolidation.

MOLLUSCA.—One of the great divisions of the animal kingdom, including
those animals which have a soft body, usually furnished with a shell,
and in which the nervous ganglia, or centres, present no definite
general arrangement. They are generally known under the denomination of
“shellfish”; the cuttle-fish, and the common snails, whelks, oysters,
mussels, and cockles, may serve as examples of them.

MONOCOTYLEDONS, or MONOCOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS.—Plants in which the seed
sends up only a single seed-leaf (or cotyledon); characterised by the
absence of consecutive layers of wood in the stem (endogenous growth),
by the veins of the leaves being generally straight, and by the parts
of the flowers being generally in multiples of three. (_Examples_,
Grasses, Lilies, Orchids, Palms, &c.)

MORAINES.—The accumulations of fragments of rock brought down by
glaciers.

MORPHOLOGY.—The law of form or structure independent of function.

MYSIS-STAGE.—A stage in the development of certain crustaceans
(prawns), in which they closely resemble the adults of a genus
(_Mysis_) belonging to a slightly lower group.

NASCENT.—Commencing development.

NATATORY.—Adapted for the purpose of swimming.

NAUPLIUS-FORM.—The earliest stage in the development of many Crustacea,
especially belonging to the lower groups. In this stage the animal has
a short body, with indistinct indications of a division into segments,
and three pairs of fringed limbs. This form of the common fresh-water
_Cyclops_ was described as a distinct genus under the name of
_Nauplius_.

NEURATION.—The arrangement of the veins or nervures in the wings of
insects.

NEUTERS.—Imperfectly developed females of certain social insects (such
as ants and bees), which perform all the labours of the community.
Hence, they are also called _workers_.

NICTITATING MEMBRANE.—A semi-transparent membrane, which can be drawn
across the eye in birds and reptiles, either to moderate the effects of
a strong light or to sweep particles of dust, &c., from the surface of
the eye.

OCELLI.—The simple eyes or stemmata of insects, usually situated on the
crown of the head between the great compound eyes.

ŒSOPHAGUS.—The gullet.

OOLITIC.—A great series of secondary rocks, so called from the texture
of some of its members, which appear to be made up of a mass of small
EGG-LIKE calcareous bodies.

OPERCULUM.—A calcareous plate employed by many Molluscæ to close the
aperture of their shell. The OPERCULAR VALVES of Cirripedes are those
which close the aperture of the shell.

ORBIT.—The bony cavity for the reception of the eye.

ORGANISM.—An organised being, whether plant or animal.

ORTHOSPERMOUS.—A term applied to those fruits of the Umbelliferæ which
have the seed straight.

OSCULANT.—Forms or groups apparently intermediate between and
connecting other groups are said to be osculant.

OVA.—Eggs.

OVARIUM or OVARY (in plants).—The lower part of the pistil or female
organ of the flower, containing the ovules or incipient seeds; by
growth after the other organs of the flower have fallen, it usually
becomes converted into the fruit.

OVIGEROUS.—Egg-bearing.

OVULES (of plants).—The seeds in the earliest condition.

PACHYDERMS.—A group of Mammalia, so called from their thick skins, and
including the elephant, rhinoceros, hippopotamus, &c.

PALÆOZOIC.—The oldest system of fossiliferous rocks.

PALPI.—Jointed appendages to some of the organs of the mouth in insects
and Crustacea.

PAPILIONACEÆ.—An order of plants (see LEGUMINOSÆ), The flowers of these
plants are called _papilionaceous_, or butterfly-like, from the fancied
resemblance of the expanded superior petals to the wings of a
butterfly.

PARASITE.—An animal or plant living upon or in, and at the expense of,
another organism.

PARTHENOGENESIS.—The production of living organisms from unimpregnated
eggs or seeds.

PEDUNCULATED.—Supported upon a stem or stalk. The pedunculated oak has
its acorns borne upon a footstool.

PELORIA or PELORISM.—The appearance of regularity of structure in the
flowers of plants which normally bear irregular flowers.

PELVIS.—The bony arch to which the hind limbs of vertebrate animals are
articulated.

PETALS.—The leaves of the corolla, or second circle of organs in a
flower. They are usually of delicate texture and brightly coloured.

PHYLLODINEOUS.—Having flattened, leaf-like twigs or leafstalks instead
of true leaves.

PIGMENT.—The colouring material produced generally in the superficial
parts of animals. The cells secreting it are called _pigment-cells_.

PINNATE.—Bearing leaflets on each side of a central stalk.

PISTILS.—The female organs of a flower, which occupy a position in the
centre of the other floral organs. The pistil is generally divisible
into the ovary or germen, the style and the stigma.

PLACENTALIA, PLACENTATA.—or PLACENTAL MAMMALS, See MAMMALIA.

PLANTIGRADES.—Quadrupeds which walk upon the whole sole of the foot,
like the bears.

PLASTIC.—Readily capable of change.

PLEISTOCENE PERIOD.—The latest portion of the Tertiary epoch.

PLUMULE (in plants).—The minute bud between the seed-leaves of
newly-germinated plants.

PLUTONIC ROCKS.—Rocks supposed to have been produced by igneous action
in the depths of the earth.

POLLEN.—The male element in flowering plants; usually a fine dust
produced by the anthers, which, by contact with the stigma effects the
fecundation of the seeds. This impregnation is brought about by means
of tubes (_pollen-tubes_) which issue from the pollen-grains adhering
to the stigma, and penetrate through the tissues until they reach the
ovary.

POLYANDROUS (flowers).—Flowers having many stamens.

POLYGAMOUS PLANTS.—Plants in which some flowers are unisexual and
others hermaphrodite. The unisexual (male and female) flowers, may be
on the same or on different plants.

POLYMORPHIC.—Presenting many forms.

POLYZOARY.—The common structure formed by the cells of the Polyzoa,
such as the well-known seamats.

PREHENSILE.—Capable of grasping.

PREPOTENT.—Having a superiority of power.

PRIMARIES.—The feathers forming the tip of the wing of a bird, and
inserted upon that part which represents the hand of man.

PROCESSES.—Projecting portions of bones, usually for the attachment of
muscles, ligaments, &c.

PROPOLIS.—A resinous material collected by the hivebees from the
opening buds of various trees.

PROTEAN.—Exceedingly variable.

PROTOZOA.—The lowest great division of the animal kingdom. These
animals are composed of a gelatinous material, and show scarcely any
trace of distinct organs. The Infusoria, Foraminifera, and sponges,
with some other forms, belong to this division.

PUPA (pl. PUPÆ).—The second stage in the development of an insect, from
which it emerges in the perfect (winged) reproductive form. In most
insects the _pupal stage_ is passed in perfect repose. The _chrysalis_
is the pupal state of butterflies.

RADICLE.—The minute root of an embryo plant.

RAMUS.—One half of the lower jaw in the Mammalia. The portion which
rises to articulate with the skull is called the _ascending ramus_.

RANGE.—The extent of country over which a plant or animal is naturally
spread. _Range in time_ expresses the distribution of a species or
group through the fossiliferous beds of the earth’s crust.

RETINA.—The delicate inner coat of the eye, formed by nervous filaments
spreading from the optic nerve, and serving for the perception of the
impressions produced by light.

RETROGRESSION.—Backward development. When an animal, as it approaches
maturity, becomes less perfectly organised than might be expected from
its early stages and known relationships, it is said to undergo a
_retrogade development_ or _metamorphosis_.

RHIZOPODS.—A class of lowly organised animals (Protozoa), having a
gelatinous body, the surface of which can be protruded in the form of
root-like processes or filaments, which serve for locomotion and the
prehension of food. The most important order is that of the
Foraminifera.

RODENTS.—The gnawing Mammalia, such as the rats, rabbits, and
squirrels. They are especially characterised by the possession of a
single pair of chisel-like cutting teeth in each jaw, between which and
the grinding teeth there is a great gap.

RUBUS.—The bramble genus.

RUDIMENTARY.—Very imperfectly developed.

RUMINANTS.—The group of quadrupeds which ruminate or chew the cud, such
as oxen, sheep, and deer. They have divided hoofs, and are destitute of
front teeth in the upper jaw.

SACRAL.—Belonging to the sacrum, or the bone composed usually of two or
more united vertebræ to which the sides of the pelvis in vertebrate
animals are attached.

SARCODE.—The gelatinous material of which the bodies of the lowest
animals (Protozoa) are composed.

SCUTELLÆ.—The horny plates with which the feet of birds are generally
more or less covered, especially in front.

SEDIMENTARY FORMATIONS.—Rocks deposited as sediments from water.

SEGMENTS.—The transverse rings of which the body of an articulate
animal or annelid is composed.

SEPALS.—The leaves or segments of the calyx, or outermost envelope of
an ordinary flower. They are usually green, but sometimes brightly
coloured.

SERRATURES.—Teeth like those of a saw.

SESSILE.—Not supported on a stem or footstalk.

SILURIAN SYSTEM.—A very ancient system of fossiliferous rocks belonging
to the earlier part of the Palæozoic series.

SPECIALISATION.—The setting apart of a particular organ for the
performance of a particular function.

SPINAL CORD.—The central portion of the nervous system in the
Vertebrata, which descends from the brain through the arches of the
vertebræ, and gives off nearly all the nerves to the various organs of
the body.

STAMENS.—The male organs of flowering plants, standing in a circle
within the petals. They usually consist of a filament and an anther,
the anther being the essential part in which the pollen, or fecundating
dust, is formed.

STERNUM.—The breast-bone.

STIGMA.—The apical portion of the pistil in flowering plants.

STIPULES.—Small leafy organs placed at the base of the footstalks of
the leaves in many plants.

STYLE.—The middle portion of the perfect pistil, which rises like a
column from the ovary and supports the stigma at its summit.

SUBCUTANEOUS.—Situated beneath the skin.

SUCTORIAL.—Adapted for sucking.

SUTURES (in the skull).—The lines of junction of the bones of which the
skull is composed.

TARSUS (pl. TARSI).—The jointed feet of articulate animals, such as
insects.

TELEOSTEAN FISHES.—Fishes of the kind familiar to us in the present
day, having the skeleton usually completely ossified and the scales
horny.

TENTACULA or TENTACLES.—Delicate fleshy organs of prehension or touch
possessed by many of the lower animals.

TERTIARY.—The latest geological epoch, immediately preceding the
establishment of the present order of things.

TRACHEA.—The windpipe or passage for the admission of air to the lungs.

TRIDACTYLE.—Three-fingered, or composed of three movable parts attached
to a common base.

TRILOBITES.—A peculiar group of extinct crustaceans, somewhat
resembling the woodlice in external form, and, like some of them,
capable of rolling themselves up into a ball. Their remains are found
only in the Palæozoic rocks, and most abundantly in those of Silurian
age.

TRIMORPHIC.—Presenting three distinct forms.

UMBELLIFERÆ.—An order of plants in which the flowers, which contain
five stamens and a pistil with two styles, are supported upon
footstalks which spring from the top of the flower stem and spread out
like the wires of an umbrella, so as to bring all the flowers in the
same head (_umbel_) nearly to the same level. (_Examples_, Parsley and
Carrot.)

UNGULATA.—Hoofed quadrupeds.

UNICELLULAR.—Consisting of a single cell.

VASCULAR.—Containing blood-vessels.

VERMIFORM.—Like a worm.

VERTEBRATA or VERTEBRATE ANIMALS.—The highest division of the animal
kingdom, so called from the presence in most cases of a backbone
composed of numerous joints or _vertebræ_, which constitutes the centre
of the skeleton and at the same time supports and protects the central
parts of the nervous system.

WHORLS.—The circles or spiral lines in which the parts of plants are
arranged upon the axis of growth.

WORKERS.—See neuters.

ZOËA-STAGE.—The earliest stage in the development of many of the higher
Crustacea, so called from the name of _Zoëa_ applied to these young
animals when they were supposed to constitute a peculiar genus.

ZOOIDS.—In many of the lower animals (such as the Corals, Medusæ, &c.)
reproduction takes place in two ways, namely, by means of eggs and by a
process of budding with or without separation from the parent of the
product of the latter, which is often very different from that of the
egg. The individuality of the species is represented by the whole of
the form produced between two sexual reproductions; and these forms,
which are apparently individual animals, have been called _zooids_.

INDEX.

Aberrant groups, 379.

Abyssinia, plants of, 340.

Acclimatisation, 112.

Adoxa, 173.

Affinities of extinct species, 301.
—, of organic beings, 378.

Agassiz on Amblyopsis, 112.
—, on groups of species suddenly appearing, 289.
—, on prophetic forms, 301.
—, on embryological succession, 310.
—, on the Glacial period, 330.
—, on embryological characters, 368.
—, on the latest tertiary forms, 278.
—, on parallelism of embryological development and geological
succession, 396.
—, Alex., on pedicellariæ, 191.

Algæ of New Zealand, 338.

Alligators, males, fighting, 69.

Alternate generations, 387.

Amblyopsis, blind fish, 112.

America, North, productions allied to those of Europe, 333.
—, boulders and glaciers of, 335.
—, South, no modern formations on west coast, 272.

Ammonites, sudden extinction of, 297.

Anagallis, sterility of, 236.

Analogy of variations, 127.

Andaman Islands inhabited by a toad, 350.

Ancylus, 345.

Animals, not domesticated from being variable, 13.
—, domestic; descended from several stocks, 14.
—, acclimatisation of, 112.

Animals of Australia, 90.
—, with thicker fur in cold climates, 107.
—, blind, in caves, 110.
—, extinct, of Australia, 310.

Anomma, 232.

Antarctic islands, ancient flora of, 355.

Antechinus, 373.

Ants attending aphides, 207.
—, slave-making instinct, 217.
—, neuters, structure of, 230.

Apes, not having acquired intellectual powers, 181.

Aphides attended by ants, 207.

Aphis, development of, 390.

Apteryx, 140.

Arab horses, 26.

Aralo-Caspian Sea, 311.

Archeopteryx, 284.

Archiac, M. de, on the succession of species, 299.

Artichoke, Jerusalem, 114.

Ascension, plants of, 347.

Asclepias, pollen of, 151.

Asparagus, 325.

Aspicarpa, 367.

Asses, striped, 127.
—, improved by selection, 30.

Ateuchus, 109.

Aucapitaine, on land-shells, 353.

Audubon, on habits of frigate-bird, 142.
—, on variation in birds’ nests, 208.
—, on heron eating seeds, 346.

Australia, animals of, 90.
—, dogs of, 211.
—, extinct animals of, 310.
—, European plants in, 337.
—, glaciers of, 335.

Azara, on flies destroying cattle, 56.

Azores, flora of, 328.

Babington, Mr., on British plants, 37.

Baer, Von, standard of Highness, 97.
—, comparison of bee and fish, 308.
—, embryonic similarity of the Vertebrata, 387.

Baker, Sir S., on the giraffe, 178.

Balancement of growth, 117.

Baleen, 182.

Barberry, flowers of, 77.

Barrande, M., on Silurian colonies, 291.
—, on the succession of species, 299.
—, on parallelism of palæozoic formations, 301.
—, on affinities of ancient species, 302.

Barriers, importance of, 317.

Bates, Mr., on mimetic butterflies, 375, 376.

Batrachians on islands, 350.

Bats, how structure acquired, 140.
—, distribution of, 351.

Bear, catching water-insects, 141.

Beauty, how acquired, 159, 414.

Bee, sting of, 163.
—, queen, killing rivals, 164.
—, Australian, extermination of, 59.

Bees, fertilizing flowers, 57.
—, hive, not sucking the red clover, 75.
—, Ligurian, 75.
—, hive, cell-making instinct, 220.
—, variation in habits, 208.
—, parasitic, 216.
—, humble, cells of, 220.

Beetles, wingless, in Madeira, 109.
—, with deficient tarsi, 109.

Bentham, Mr., on British plants, 37.
—, on classification, 369.

Berkeley, Mr., on seeds in salt-water, 324.

Bermuda, birds of, 348.

Birds acquiring fear, 208.
—, beauty of, 161.
—, annually cross the Atlantic, 329.
—, colour of, on continents, 107.
—, footsteps, and remains of, in secondary rocks, 284.
—, fossil, in caves of Brazil, 310.
—, of Madeira, Bermuda, and Galapagos, 349, 349.
—, song of males, 70.
—, transporting seeds, 328.
—, waders, 345.
—, wingless, 108, 140.

Bizcacha, 318.
—, , affinities of, 379.

Bladder for swimming, in fish, 147.

Blindness of cave animals, 110.

Blyth, Mr., on distinctness of Indian cattle, 14.
—, on striped Hemionus, 128.
—, on crossed geese, 240.

Borrow, Mr., on the Spanish pointer, 26.

Bory St. Vincent, on Batrachians, 350.

Bosquet, M., on fossil Chthamalus, 284.

Boulders, erratic, on the Azores, 328.

Branchiæ, 148, 149.
—, of crustaceans, 152.

Braun, Prof., on the seeds of Fumariaceæ, 174.

Brent, Mr., on house-tumblers, 210.

Britain, mammals of, 352.

Broca, Prof., on Natural Selection, 170.

Bronn, Prof., on duration of specific forms, 275.
—, various objections by, 170.

Brown, Robert, on classification, 366.

Brown-Sequard, on inherited mutilations, 108.

Busk, Mr., on the Polyzoa, 193.

Butterflies, mimetic, 375, 376.

Buzareingues, on sterility of varieties, 258.

Cabbage, varieties of, crossed, 78.

Calceolaria, 239.

Canary-birds, sterility of hybrids, 240.

Cape de Verde Islands, productions of, 354.
—, plants of, on mountains, 337.

Cape of Good Hope, plants of, 101, 347.

Carpenter, Dr., on foraminifera, 308.

Carthemus, 173.

Catasetum, 155, 372.

Cats, with blue eyes, deaf, 9.
—, variation in habits of, 209.
—, curling tail when going to spring, 162.

Cattle destroying fir-trees, 56.
—, destroyed by flies in Paraguay, 56.
—, breeds of, locally extinct, 86.
—, fertility of Indian and European breeds, 241.
—, Indian, 14, 241.

Cave, inhabitants of, blind, 110.

Cecidomyia, 387.

Celts, proving antiquity of man, 13.

Centres of creation, 320.

Cephalopodæ, structures of eyes, 151.
—, development of, 390.

Cercopithecus, tail of, 189.

Ceroxylus laceratus, 182.

Cervulus, 240.

Cetacea, teeth and hair, 115.
—, development of the whalebone, 182.

Cetaceans, 182.

Ceylon, plants of, 338.

Chalk formation, 297.

Characters, divergence of, 86.
—, sexual, variable, 119, 123.
—, adaptive or analogical, 373.

Charlock, 59.

Checks to increase, 53.
—, mutual, 55.

Chelæ of Crustaceans, 193.

Chickens, instinctive tameness of, 211.

Chironomus, its asexual reproduction, 387.

Chthamalinæ, 271.

Chthamalus, cretacean species of, 384.

Circumstances favourable to selection of domestic products, 29.
—, to natural selection, 80.

Cirripedes capable of crossing, 79.
—, carapace aborted, 118.
—, their ovigerous frena, 148.
—, fossil, 284.
—, larvæ of, 389.

Claparède, Prof., on the hair-claspers of the Acaridæ, 153.

Clarke, Rev. W.B., on old glaciers in Australia, 335.

Classification, 363.

Clift, Mr., on the succession of types, 310.

Climate, effects of, in checking increase of beings, 54.
—, adaptation of, to organisms, 112.

Climbing plants, 147.
—, development of, 96.

Clover visited by bees, 75.

Cobites, intestine of, 147.

Cockroach, 59.

Collections, palæontological, poor, 270.

Colour, influenced by climate, 107.
—, in relation to attacks by flies, 159.

Columba livia, parent of domestic pigeons, 17.

Colymbetes, 345.

Compensation of growth, 117.

Compositæ, flowers and seeds of, 116.
—, outer and inner florets of, 173.
—, male flowers of, 398.

Conclusion, general, 421.

Conditions, slight changes in, favourable to fertility, 251.

Convergence of genera, 100.

Coot, 142.

Cope, Prof., on the acceleration or retardation of the period of
reproduction, 149.

Coral-islands, seeds drifted to, 326.
—, reefs, indicating movements of earth, 326.

Corn-crake, 143.

Correlated variation in domestic productions, 9.

Coryanthes, 154.

Creation, single centres of, 320.

Crinum, 238.

Croll, Mr., on subaërial denudation, 267, 269.
—, on the age of our oldest formations, 286.
—, on alternate Glacial periods in the North and South, 336.

Crosses, reciprocal, 244.

Crossing of domestic animals, importance in altering breeds, 15.
—, advantages of, 76, 77.
—, unfavourable to selection, 80.

Crüger, Dr., on Coryanthes, 154.

Crustacea of New Zealand, 338.

Crustacean, blind, 110.
air-breathers, 152.

Crustaceans, their chelæ, 193.

Cryptocerus, 231.

Ctenomys, blind, 110.

Cuckoo, instinct of, 205, 212.

Cunningham, Mr., on the flight of the logger-headed duck, 108.

Currants, grafts of, 246.

Currents of sea, rate of, 325.

Cuvier on conditions of existence, 205.
—, on fossil monkeys, 283, 284.

Cuvier, Fred., on instinct, 205.

Cyclostoma, resisting salt water, 353.

Dana, Prof., on blind cave-animals, 111.
—, on relations of crustaceans of Japan, 334.
—, on crustaceans of New Zealand, 338.

Dawson, Dr., on eozoon, 287.

De Candolle, Aug. Pyr., on struggle for existence, 49.
—, on umbelliferæ, 116.
—, on general affinities, 379.

De Candolle, Alph., on the variability of oaks, 40.
—, on low plants, widely dispersed, 359.
—, on widely-ranging plants being variable, 43.
—, on naturalisation, 89.
—, on winged seeds, 117.
—, on Alpine species suddenly becoming rare, 135.
—, on distribution of plants with large seeds, 326.
—, on vegetation of Australia, 340.
—, on fresh-water plants, 345.
—, on insular plants, 347.

Degradation of rocks, 266.

Denudation, rate of, 268.
—, of oldest rocks, 287.
—, of granitic areas, 274.

Development of ancient forms, 307.

Devonian system, 305.

Dianthus, fertility of crosses, 243.

Dimorphism in plants, 35, 252.

Dirt on feet of birds, 328.

Dispersal, means of, 323.
—, during Glacial period, 330.

Distribution, geographical, 316.
—, means of, 323.

Disuse, effect of, under nature, 108.

Diversification of means for same general purpose, 153.

Division, physiological, of labour, 89.

Divergence of character, 86.

Dog, resemblance of jaw to that of the Thylacinus, 374.

Dogs, hairless, with imperfect teeth, 9.
—, descended from several wild stocks, 15.
—, domestic instincts of, 210.
—, inherited civilisation of, 210.
—, fertility of breeds together, 241.
—, of crosses, 256.
—, proportions of body in different breeds, when young, 392.

Domestication, variation under, 5.

Double flowers, 230.

Downing, Mr., on fruit-trees in America, 66.

Dragon-flies, intestines of, 147.

Drift-timber, 326.

Driver-ant, 232.

Drones killed by other bees, 164.

Duck, domestic, wings of, reduced, 8.
—, beak of, 183.
—, logger-headed, 140.

Duckweed, 344.

Dugong, affinities of, 365.

Dung-beetles with deficient tarsi, 108.

Dyticus, 345.

Earl, Mr., W., on the Malay Archipelago, 351.

Ears, drooping, in domestic animals, 8.
—, rudimentary, 400.

Earth, seeds in roots of trees, 326.
—, charged with seeds, 328.

Echinodermata, their pedicellariæ, 191.

Eciton, 230.

Economy of organisation, 117.

Edentata, teeth and hair, 115.
—, fossil species of, 417.

Edwards, Milne, on physiological division of labour, 89.
—, on gradations of structure, 156.

Edwards, on embryological characters, 368.

Eggs, young birds escaping from, 68.

Egypt, productions of, not modified, 169.

Electric organs, 150.

Elephant, rate of increase, 51.
—, of Glacial period, 113.

Embryology, 386.

Eozoon Canadense, 287.

Epilipsy inherited, 108.

Existence, struggle for, 48.
—, condition of, 167.

Extinction, as bearing on natural selection, 96.
—, of domestic varieties, 93.
—, , 293.

Eye, structure of, 144.
—, correction for aberration, 163.

Eyes, reduced, in moles, 110.

Fabre, M., on hymenoptera fighting, 69.
—, on parasitic sphex, 216.
—, on Sitaris, 394.

Falconer, Dr., on naturalisation of plants in India, 51.
—, on elephants and mastodons, 306.
—, and Cautley on mammals of sub-Himalayan beds, 311.

Falkland Islands, wolf of, 351.

Faults, 268.

Faunas, marine, 317.

Fear, instinctive, in birds, 211.

Feet of birds, young molluscs adhering to, 345.

Fertilisation variously effected, 154, 161.

Fertility of hybrids, 238.
—, from slight changes in conditions, 252.
—, of crossed varieties, 255.

Fir-trees destroyed by cattle, 56.
—, pollen of, 164.

Fish, flying, 140.
—, teleostean, sudden appearance of, 285.
—, eating seeds, 327, 346.
—, fresh-water, distribution of, 343.

Fishes, ganoid, now confined to fresh water, 83.
—, electric organs of, 150.
—, ganoid, living in fresh water, 296.
—, of southern hemisphere, 338.

Flat-fish, their structure, 186.

Flight, powers of, how acquired, 140.

Flint-tools, proving antiquity of man, 13.

Flower, Prof., on the larynx, 190.
—, on Halitherium, 302.
—, on the resemblance between the jaws of the dog and Thylacinus, 375.
—, on the homology of the feet of certain marsupials, 382.

Flowers, structure of in relation to crossing, 73.
—, of compositæ and umbelliferæ, 116, 173.
—, beauty of, 161.
—, double, 230.

Flysch formation, destitute of organic remains, 271.

Forbes, Mr. D., on glacial action in the Andes, 335.

Forbes, E., on colours of shells, 107.
—, on abrupt range of shells in depth, 135.
—, on poorness of palæontological collections, 270.
—, on continuous succession of genera, 293.
—, on continental extensions, 323.
—, on distribution during Glacial period, 330.
—, on parallelism in time and space, 361.

Forests, changes in, in America, 58.

Formation, Devonian, 305.
—, Cambrian, 287.
Formations, thickness of, in Britain, 268.
—, intermittent, 277.

Formica rufescens, 216.
—, sanguinea, 217.
—, flava, neuter of, 231.

Forms, lowly organised, long enduring, 99.

Frena, ovigerous, of cirripedes, 148.

Fresh-water productions, dispersal of, 343.

Fries on species in large genera being closely allied to other species,
45.

Frigate-bird, 142.

Frogs on islands, 350.

Fruit-trees, gradual improvement of, 27.
—, in United States, 66.
—, varieties of, acclimatised in United States, 114.

Fuci, crossed, 249, 343.

Fur, thicker in cold climates, 107.

Furze, 388.

Galapagos Archipelago, birds of, 348.
—, productions of, 353, 355.

Galaxias, its wide range, 343.

Galeopithecus, 139.

Game, increase of, checked by vermin, 55.

Gärtner on sterility of hybrids, 237, 241.
—, on reciprocal crosses, 243.
—, on crossed maize and verbascum, 257, 258.
—, on comparison of hybrids and mongrels, 259, 260.

Gaudry, Prof., on intermediate genera of fossil mammals in Attica, 301.

Geese, fertility when crossed, 307.
—, upland, 142.

Geikie, Mr., on subaërial denudation, 267.

Genealogy, important in classification, 369.

Generations, alternate, 387.

Geoffroy St. Hilaire, on balancement, 117.
—, on homologous organs, 382.
—, , Isidore, on variability of repeated parts, 118.
—, on correlation, in monstrosities, 9.
—, on correlation, 115.
—, on variable parts being often monstrous, 122.

Geographical distribution, 316.

Geography, ancient, 427.

Geology, future progress of, 427.
—, imperfection of the record, 427.

Gervais, Prof., on Typotherium, 302.

Giraffe, tail of, 157.
—, structure of, 177.

Glacial period, 330.
—, affecting the North and South, 335.

Glands, mammary, 189.

Gmelin, on distribution, 330.

Godwin-Austin, Mr., on the Malay Archipelago, 280.

Goethe, on compensation of growth, 117.

Gomphia, 174.

Gooseberry, grafts of, 246.

Gould, Dr. Aug. A., on land-shells, 353.

Gould, Mr., on colours of birds, 107.
—, on instincts of cuckoo, 214.
—, on distribution of genera of birds, 358.

Gourds, crossed, 258.

Graba, on the Uria lacrymans, 72.

Grafting, capacity of, 245, 246.

Granite, areas of denuded, 274.

Grasses, varieties of, 88.

Gray, Dr. Asa, on the variability of oaks, 40.
—, on man not causing variability, 62.
—, on sexes of the holly, 74.
—, on trees of the United States, 79.
—, on naturalised plants in the United States, 89.
—, on æstivation, 174.
—, on Alpine plants, 330.
—, on rarity of intermediate varieties, 136.

Gray, Dr. J.E., on striped mule, 128.

Grebe, 142.

Grimm, on asexual reproduction, 387.

Groups, aberrant, 378.

Grouse, colours of, 66.
—, red, a doubtful species, 38.

Growth, compensation of, 117.

Günther, Dr., on flat-fish, 187.
—, on prehensile tails, 189.
—, on the fishes of Panama, 317.
—, on the range of fresh-water fishes, 343.
—, on the limbs of Lepidosiren, 399.

Haast, Dr., on glaciers of New Zealand, 335.

Habit, effect of, under domestication, 8.
—, effect of, under nature, 108.
—, diversified, of same species, 141.

Häckel, Prof., on classification and the lines of descent, 381.

Hair and teeth, correlated, 115.

Halitherium, 302.

Harcourt, Mr. E.V., on the birds of Madeira, 348.

Hartung, M., on boulders in the Azores, 328.

Hazel-nuts, 325.

Hearne, on habits of bears, 141.

Heath, changes in vegetation, 55.

Hector, Dr., on glaciers of New Zealand, 335.

Heer, Oswald, on ancient cultivated plants, 13.
—, on plants of Madeira, 83.

Helianthemum, 174.

Helix, resisting salt water, 353.

Helix pomatia, 353.

Helmholtz, M., on the imperfection of the human eye, 163.

Helosciadium, 325.

Hemionus, striped, 128.

Hensen, Dr., on the eyes of Cephalopods, 152.

Herbert, W., on struggle for existence, 49.
—, on sterility of hybrids, 238.

Hermaphrodites crossing, 76.

Heron eating seed, 346.

Heron, Sir R., on peacocks, 70.

Heusinger, on white animals poisoned by certain plants, 9.

Hewitt, Mr., on sterility of first crosses, 249.

Hildebrand, Prof., on the self-sterility of Corydalis, 238.

Hilgendorf, on intermediate varieties, 275.

Himalaya, glaciers of, 335.
—, plants of, 337.

Hippeastrum, 238.

Hippocampus, 189.

Hofmeister, Prof., on the movements of plants, 197.

Holly-trees, sexes of, 73.

Hooker, Dr., on trees of New Zealand, 78.
—, on acclimatisation of Himalayan trees, 112.
—, on flowers of umbelliferæ, 116.
—, on the position of ovules, 172.
—, on glaciers of Himalaya, 335.
—, on algæ of New Zealand, 338.
—, on vegetation at the base of the Himalaya, 338.
—, on plants of Tierra del Fuego, 336.
—, on Australian plants, 337, 355.
—, on relations of flora of America, 340.
—, on flora of the Antarctic lands, 341, 354.
—, on the plants of the Galapagos, 349, 354.
—, on glaciers of the Lebanon, 335.
—, on man not causing variability, 62.
—, on plants of mountains of Fernando Po, 337.

Hooks on palms, 158.
—, on seeds, on islands, 349.

Hopkins, Mr., on denudation, 274.

Hornbill, remarkable instinct of, 234.

Horns, rudimentary, 400.

Horse, fossil in La Plata, 294.
—, proportions of, when young, 392.

Horses destroyed by flies in Paraguay, 56.
—, striped, 128.

Horticulturists, selection applied by, 23.

Huber on cells of bees, 224.

Huber, P., on reason blended with instinct, 205.
—, on habitual nature of instincts, 206.
—, on slave-making ants, 216.
—, on Melipona domestica, 220.

Hudson, Mr., on the Ground-woodpecker of La Plata, 142.
—, on the Molothrus, 215.

Humble-bees, cells of, 221.

Hunter, J., on secondary sexual characters, 119.

Hutton, Captain, on crossed geese, 240.

Huxley, Prof., on structure of hermaphrodites, 79.
—, on the affinities of the Sirenia, 302.
—, on forms connecting birds and reptiles, 302.
—, on homologous organs, 386.
—, on the development of aphis, 390.

Hybrids and mongrels compared, 259.

Hybridism, 235.

Hydra, structure of, 147.

Hymenoptera, fighting, 69.

Hymenopterous insect, diving, 142.

Hyoseris, 173.

Ibla, 118.

Icebergs transporting seeds, 329.

Increase, rate of, 50.

Individuals, numbers favourable to selection, 80.
—, many, whether simultaneously created, 322.

Inheritance, laws of, 10.
—, at corresponding ages, 10, 67.

Insects, colour of, fitted for their stations, 66.
—, sea-side, colours of, 107.
—, blind, in caves, 110.
—, luminous, 151.
—, their resemblance to various objects, 181.
—, neuter, 2320.

Instinct, 205.
—, , not varying simultaneously with structure, 229.

Instincts, domestic, 209.

Intercrossing, advantages of, 76, 251.

Islands, oceanic, 347.

Isolation favourable to selection, 81.

Japan, productions of, 334.

Java, plants of, 337.

Jones, Mr. J.M., on the birds of Bermuda, 348.

Jordain, M., on the eye-spots of star fishes, 144.

Jukes, Prof., on subaërial denudation, 267.

Jussieu on classification, 367.

Kentucky, caves of, 111.

Kerguelen-land, flora of, 341, 354.

Kidney-bean, acclimatisation of, 114.

Kidneys of birds, 115.

Kirby, on tarsi deficient in beetles, 108.

Knight, Andrew, on cause of variation, 5.

Kölreuter, on intercrossing, 76.
—, on the barberry, 77.
—, on sterility of hybrids, 237.
—, on reciprocal crosses, 243.
—, on crossed varieties of nicotiana, 258.
—, on crossing male and hermaphrodite flowers, 397.

Lamarck, on adaptive characters, 373.

Lancelet, 99.
—, , eyes of, 145.

Landois, on the development of the wings of insects, 148.

Land-shells, distribution of, 353.
—, of Madeira, naturalised, 357.
—, resisting salt water, 353.

Languages, classification of, 371.

Lankester, Mr. E. Ray, on longevity, 169.
—, on homologies, 385.

Lapse, great, of time, 266.

Larvæ, 388, 389.

Laurel, nectar secreted by the leaves, 73.

Laurentian formation, 287.

Laws of variation, 106.

Leech, varieties of, 59.

Leguminosæ, nectar secreted by glands, 73.

Leibnitz’ attack on Newton, 421.

Lepidosiren, 83, 303.
—, , limbs in a nascent condition, 398, 399.

Lewes, Mr. G.H., on species not having changed in Egypt, 169.
—, on the Salamandra atra, 397.
—, on many forms of life having been at first evolved, 425.

Life, struggle for, 49.

Lingula, Silurian, 286.

Linnæus, aphorism of, 365.

Lion, mane of, 69.
—, young of, striped, 388.

Lobelia fulgens, 57, 77.

Lobelia, sterility of crosses, 238.

Lockwood, Mr., on the ova of the Hippocampus, 189.

Locusts transporting seeds, 327.

Logan, Sir W., on Laurentian formation, 287.

Lowe, Rev. R.T., on locusts visiting Madeira, 327.

Lowness, of structure connected with variability, 118.
—, related to wide distribution, 359.

Lubbock, Sir J., on the nerves of coccus, 35.
—, on secondary sexual characters, 124.
—, on a diving hymenopterous insect, 142.
—, on affinities, 280.
—, on metamorphoses, 386, 389.

Lucas, Dr. P., on inheritance, 9.
—, on resemblance of child to parent, 261.

Lund and Clausen, on fossils of Brazil, 310.

Lyell, Sir C., on the struggle for existence, 49.
—, on modern changes of the earth, 75.
—, on terrestrial animals not having been developed on islands, 180.
—, on a carboniferous land-shell, 271.
—, on strata beneath Silurian system, 287.
—, on the imperfection of the geological record, 289.
—, on the appearance of species, 289.
—, on Barrande’s colonies, 291.
—, on tertiary formations of Europe and North America, 298.
—, on parallelism of tertiary formations, 301.
—, on transport of seeds by icebergs, 328.
—, on great alternations of climate, 342.
—, on the distribution of fresh-water shells, 345.
—, on land-shells of Madeira, 357.

Lyell and Dawson, on fossilized trees in Nova Scotia, 278.

Lythrum salicaria, trimorphic, 254.

Macleay, on analogical characters, 373.

Macrauchenia, 302.

McDonnell, Dr., on electric organs, 150.

Madeira, plants of, 83.
—, beetles of, wingless, 109.
—, fossil land-shells of, 311.
—, birds of, 348.

Magpie tame in Norway, 209.

Males, fighting, 69.

Maize, crossed, 257.

Malay Archipelago, compared with Europe, 280.
—, mammals of, 352.

Malm, on flat-fish, 186.

Malpighiaceæ, small imperfect flowers of, 173.

Malpighiaceæ, 367.

Mammæ, their development, 189.
—, rudimentary, 397.

Mammals, fossil, in secondary formation, 283.
—, insular, 351.

Man, origin of, 428.

Manatee, rudimentary nails of, 400.

Marsupials of Australia, 90.
—, , fossil species of, 382.
—, , structure of their feet, 310.

Martens, M., experiment on seeds, 325.

Martin, Mr. W.C., on striped mules, 129.

Masters, Dr., on Saponaria, 174.

Matteucci, on the electric organs of rays, 150.

Matthiola, reciprocal crosses of, 244.

Maurandia, 197.

Means of dispersal, 323.

Melipona domestica, 220.

Merrill, Dr., on the American cuckoo, 212.

Metamorphism of oldest rocks, 287.

Mice destroying bees, 56.
—, acclimatisation of, 113.
—, tails of, 189.

Miller, Prof., on the cells of bees, 221, 224.

Mirabilis, crosses of, 243.

Missel-thrush, 59.

Mistletoe, complex relations of, 2.

Mivart, Mr., on the relation of hair and teeth, 115.
—, on the eyes of cephalopods, 151.
—, various objections to Natural Selection, 174.
—, on abrupt modifications, 201.
—, on the resemblance of the mouse and antechinus, 373.

Mocking-thrush of the Galapagos, 357.

Modification of species, not abrupt, 424.

Moles, blind, 110.

Molothrus, habits of, 215.

Mongrels, fertility and sterility of, 255.
—, and hybrids compared, 259.

Monkeys, fossil, 284, 285.

Monachanthus, 372.

Mons, Van, on the origin of fruit-trees, 21.

Monstrosities, 33.

Moquin-Tandon, on sea-side plants, 107.

Morphology, 382.

Morren, on the leaves of Oxalis, 197.

Moths, hybrid, 240.

Mozart, musical powers of, 206.

Mud, seeds in, 345.

Mules, striped, 129.

Müller, Adolph, on the instincts of the cuckoo, 213.

Müller, Dr. Ferdinand, on Alpine Australian plants, 337.

Müller, Fritz, on dimorphic crustaceans, 35, 233.
—, on the lancelet, 99.
—, on air-breathing crustaceans, 152.
—, on climbing plants, 197.
—, on the self-sterility of orchids, 238.
—, on embryology in relation to classification, 368.
—, on the metamorphoses of crustaceans, 390, 395.
—, on terrestrial and fresh-water organisms not undergoing any
metamorphosis, 394.

Multiplication of species not indefinite, 101.

Murchison, Sir, R., on the formations of Russia, 272.
—, on azoic formations, 286.
—, on extinction, 293.

Murie, Dr., on the modification of the skull in old age, 149.

Murray, Mr. A., on cave-insects, 111.

Mustela vison, 138.

Myanthus, 372.

Myrmecocystus, 231.

Myrmica, eyes of, 232.

Nägeli, on morphological characters, 170.

Nails, rudimentary, 400.

Nathusius, Von, on pigs, 159.

Natural history, future progress of, 426.
—, selection, 62.
—, system, 364.

Naturalisation of forms distinct from the indigenous species, 89.
—, in New Zealand, 163.

Naudin, on analagous variations in gourds, 125.
—, on hybrid gourds, 258.
—, on reversion, 260.

Nautilus, Silurian, 286.

Nectar of plants, 73.

Nectaries, how formed, 73.

Nelumbium luteum, 346.

Nests, variation in, 208, 228, 234.

Neuter insects, 230, 231.

New Zealand, productions of, not perfect, 163.
—, naturalised products of, 309.
—, fossil birds of, 310.
—, glaciers of, 335.
—, crustaceans of, 338.
—, algæ of, 338.
—, flora of, 354.
—, number of plants of, 374.

Newman, Col., on humble-bees, 57.

Newton, Prof., on earth attached to a partridge’s foot, 328.

Newton, Sir I., attacked for irreligion, 421.

Nicotiana, crossed varieties of, 258.
—, certain species very sterile, 243.

Nitsche, Dr., on the Polyzoa, 193.

Noble, Mr., on fertility of Rhododendron, 239.

Nodules, phosphatic, in azoic rocks, 287.

Oaks, variability of, 40.

Œnonis, small imperfect flowers of, 173.

Onites apelles, 108.

Orchids, fertilisation of, 154.
—, the development of their flowers, 195.
—, forms of, 372.

Orchis, pollen of, 151.

Organisation, tendency to advance, 97.

Organs of extreme perfection, 143.
—, electric, of fishes, 150.
—, of little importance, 156.
—, homologous, 382.
—, rudiments of, and nascent, 397.

Ornithorhynchus, 83, 367.
—, mammæ of, 190.

Ostrich not capable of flight, 180.
—, habit of laying eggs together, 215.
—, American, two species of, 318.

Otter, habits of, how acquired, 138.

Ouzel, water, 142.

Owen, Prof., on birds not flying, 108.
—, on vegetative repetition, 118.
—, on variability of unusually developed parts, 119.
—, on the eyes of fishes, 145.
—, on the swim-bladder of fishes, 148.
—, on fossil horse of La Plata, 294.
—, on generalised form, 301.
—, on relation of ruminants and pachyderms, 303.
—, on fossil birds of New Zealand, 310.
—, on succession of types, 310.
—, on affinities of the dugong, 365.
—, on homologous organs, 383.
—, on the metamorphosis of cephalopods, 390.

Pacific Ocean, faunas of, 317.

Pacini, on electric organs, 151.

Paley, on no organ formed to give pain, 163.

Pallas, on the fertility of the domesticated descendants of wild
stocks, 241.

Palm with hooks, 158.

Papaver bracteatum, 174.

Paraguay, cattle destroyed by flies, 56.

Parasites, 215.

Partridge, with ball of dirt attached to foot, 328.

Parts greatly developed, variable, 119.

Parus major, 141.

Passiflora, 238.

Peaches in United States, 66.

Pear, grafts of, 246.

Pedicellariæ, 191.

Pelargonium, flowers of, 166.
—, sterility of, 239.

Peloria, 116.

Pelvis of women, 115.

Period, glacial, 330.

Petrels, habits of, 142.

Phasianus, fertility of hybrids, 240.

Pheasant, young, wild, 211.

Pictet, Prof., on groups of species suddenly appearing, 282.
—, on rate of organic change, 291.
—, on continuous succession of genera, 293.
—, on change in latest tertiary forms, 278.
—, on close alliance of fossils in consecutive formations, 306.
—, on early transitional links, 283.

Pierce, Mr., on varieties of wolves, 71.

Pigeons with feathered feet and skin between toes, 9.
—, breeds described, and origin of, 15.
—, breeds of, how produced, 28, 30.
—, tumbler, not being able to get out of egg, 68.
—, reverting to blue colour, 127.
—, instinct of tumbling, 210.
—, young of, 392.

Pigs, black, not affected by the paint-root, 9.
—, modified by want of exercise, 159.

Pistil, rudimentary, 397.

Plants, poisonous, not affecting certain coloured animals, 9.
—, selection, applied to, 27.
—, gradual improvement of, 27.
—, not improved in barbarous countries, 27.
—, dimorphic, 35, 253.
—, destroyed by insects, 53.
—, in midst of range, have to struggle with other plants, 60.
—, nectar of, 73.
—, fleshy, on sea-shores, 107.
—, climbing, 147, 196.
—, fresh-water, distribution of, 345.
—, low in scale, widely distributed, 359.

Pleuronectidæ, their structure, 186.

Plumage, laws of change in sexes of birds, 70.

Plums in the United States, 66.

Pointer dog, origin of, 25.
—, habits of, 210.

Poison not affecting certain coloured animals, 9.

Poison, similar effect of, on animals and plants, 425.

Pollen of fir-trees, 164.
—, transported by various means, 154, 161.

Pollinia, their development, 195.

Polyzoa, their avicularia, 193.

Poole, Col., on striped hemionus, 128.

Potemogeton, 346.

Pouchet, on the colours of flat-fish, 188.

Prestwich, Mr., on English and French eocene formations, 300.

Proctotrupes, 142.

Proteolepas, 118.

Proteus, 112.

Psychology, future progress of, 428.

Pyrgoma, found in the chalk, 284.

Quagga, striped, 129.

Quatrefages, M., on hybrid moths, 240.

Quercus, variability of, 40.

Quince, grafts of, 246.

Rabbit, disposition of young, 211.

Races, domestic, characters of, 12.

Race-horses, Arab, 26.
—, English, 323.

Radcliffe, Dr., the electrical organs of the torpedo, 150.

Ramond, on plants of Pyrenees, 331.

Ramsay, Prof., on subaërial denudation, 267.
—, on thickness of the British formations, 268, 269.
—, on faults, .

Ramsay, Mr., on instincts of cuckoo, 213.

Ratio of increase, 50.

Rats, supplanting each other, 59.
—, acclimatisation of, 113.
—, blind, in cave, 110.

Rattle-snake, 162.

Reason and instinct, 205.

Recapitulation, general, 404.

Reciprocity of crosses, 243.

Record, geological, imperfect, 264.

Rengger, on flies destroying cattle, 56.

Reproduction, rate of, 50.

Resemblance, protective, of insects, 181.
—, to parents in mongrels and hybrids, 260.

Reversion, law of inheritance, 11.
—, in pigeons, to blue colour, 127.

Rhododendron, sterility of, 239.

Richard, Prof., on Aspicarpa, 367.

Richardson, Sir J., on structure of squirrels, 139.
—, on fishes of the southern hemisphere, 338.

Robinia, grafts of, 246.

Rodents, blind, 110.

Rogers, Prof., Map of N. America, 274.

Rudimentary organs, 397.

Rudiments important for classification, 367.

Rütimeyer, on Indian cattle, 14, 241.

Sageret, on grafts, 246.

Salamandra atra, 397.

Saliva used in nests, 228.

Salmons, males fighting, and hooked jaws of, 69.

Salt-water, how far injurious to seeds, 325.
—, not destructive to land-shells, 353.

Salter, Mr., on early death of hybrid embryos, 249.

Salvin, Mr., on the beaks of ducks, 184.

Saurophagus sulphuratus, 141.

Schacht, Prof., on Phyllotaxy, 173.

Schiödte, on blind insects, 110.
—, on flat-fish, 186.

Schlegel, on snakes, 115.

Schöbl, Dr., on the ears of mice, 172.

Scott, Mr. J., on the self-sterility of orchids, 238.
—, on the crossing of varieties of verbascum, 258.

Sea-water, how far injurious to seeds, 325.
—, not destructive to land-shells, 325.

Sebright, Sir J., on crossed animals, 15.

Sedgwick, Prof., on groups of species suddenly appearing, 282.

Seedlings destroyed by insects, 53.

Seeds, nutriment in, 60.
—, winged, 117.
—, means of dissemination, 154, 161, 327, 328.
—, power of resisting salt-water, 325.
—, in crops and intestines of birds, 326, 327.
—, eaten by fish, 327, 346.
—, in mud, 345.
—, hooked, on islands, 349.

Selection of domestic products, 22.
—, principle not of recent origin, 27.
—, unconscious, 27.
—, natural, 62.
—, sexual, 69.
—, objections to term, 63.
—, natural, has not induced sterility, 247.

Sexes, relations of, 69.

Sexual characters variable, 123.
—, selection, 69.

Sheep, Merino, their selection, 23.
—, two sub-breeds, unintentionally produced, 26.
—, mountain, varieties of, 59.

Shells, colours of, 107.
—, hinges of, 154.
—, littoral, seldom embedded, 270.
—, fresh-water, long retain the same forms, 308.
—, fresh-water, dispersal of, 344.
—, of Madeira, 349.
—, land, distribution of, 349.
—, land, resisting salt water, 325.

Shrew-mouse, 373.

Silene, infertility of crosses, 243.

Silliman, Prof., on blind rat, 110.

Sirenia, their affinities, 302.

Sitaris, metamorphosis of, 394.

Skulls of young mammals, 159, 384.

Slave-making instinct, 216.

Smith, Col. Hamilton, on striped horses, 129.

Smith, Dr., on the Polyzoa, 193.

Smith, Mr. Fred., on slave-making ants, 217.
—, on neuter ants, 231.

Snake with tooth for cutting through egg-shell, 214.

Somerville, Lord, on selection of sheep, 23.

Sorbus, grafts of, 246.

Sorex, 373.

Spaniel, King Charles’ breed, 25.

Specialisation of organs, 98.

Species, polymorphic, 35.
—, dominant, 43.
—, common, variable, 42.
—, in large genera variable, 44.
—, groups of, suddenly appearing, 282, 285.
—, beneath Silurian formations, 287.
—, successively appearing, 290.
—, changing simultaneously throughout the world, 297.

Spencer, Lord, on increase in size of cattle, 26.

Spencer, Mr. Herbert, on the first steps in differentiation, 100.
—, on the tendency to an equilibrium in all forces, 252.

Sphex, parasitic, 216.

Spiders, development of, 390.

Sports in plants, 8.

Sprengel, C.C., on crossing, 76.
—, on ray-florets, 116.

Squalodon, 302.

Squirrels, gradations in structure, 139.

Staffordshire, heath, changes in, 55.

Stag-beetles, fighting, 69.

Star fishes, eyes of, 144.
—, their pedicellariæ, 192.

Sterility from changed conditions of life, 7.
—, of hybrids, 236.
—, laws of, 241.
—, causes of, 247.
—, from unfavourable conditions, 250.
—, not induced through natural selection, 247.

St. Helena, productions of, 347.

St. Hilaire, Aug., on variability of certain plants, 174.
—, on classification, 368.

St. John, Mr., on habits of cats, 209.

Sting of bee, 163.

Stocks, aboriginal, of domestic animals, 14.

Strata, thickness of, in Britain, 268, 269.

Stripes on horses, 128.

Structure, degrees of utility of, 159.

Struggle for existence, 48.

Succession, geological, 290.
—, of types in same areas, 310.

Swallow, one species supplanting another, 59.

Swaysland, Mr., on earth adhering to the feet of migratory birds, 328.

Swifts, nests of, 228.

Swim-bladder, 148.

Switzerland, lake habitations of, 13.

System, natural, 364.

Tail of giraffe, 157.
—, of aquatic animals, 157.
—, prehensile, 188.
—, rudimentary, 400.

Tanais, dimorphic, 36.

Tarsi deficient, 108.

Tausch, Dr., on umbelliferæ, 173.

Teeth and hair correlated, 115.
—, rudimentary, in embryonic calf, 397, 420.

Tegetmeier, Mr., on cells of bees, 222, 226.

Temminck, on distribution aiding classification, 369.

Tendrils, their development, 196.

Thompson, Sir W., on the age of the habitable world, 286.
—, on the consolidation of the crust of the earth, 409.

Thouin, on grafts, 246.

Thrush, aquatic species of, 142.
—, mocking, of the Galapagos, 356.
—, young of, spotted, 388.
—, nest of, 234.

Thuret, M., on crossed fuci, 243.

Thwaites, Mr., on acclimatisation, 112.

Thylacinus, 374.

Tierra del Fuego, dogs of, 211.
—, plants of, 341.

Timber-drift, 326.

Time, lapse of, 266.
—, by itself not causing modification, 81.

Titmouse, 141.

Toads on islands, 350.

Tobacco, crossed varieties of, 258.

Tomes, Mr., on the distribution of bats, 351.

Transitions in varieties rare, 134.

Traquair, Dr., on flat-fish, 188.

Trautschold, on intermediate varieties, 275.

Trees on islands belong to peculiar orders, 350.
—, with separated sexes, 78.

Trifolium pratense, 57, 75.
—, incarnatum, 75.

Trigonia, 296.

Trilobites, 286.
—, sudden extinction of, 297.

Trimen, Mr., on imitating-insects, 377.

Trimorphism in plants, 35, 252.

Troglodytes, 234.

Tuco-tuco, blind, 110.

Tumbler pigeons, habits of, hereditary, 210.
—, young of, 392.

Turkey-cock, tuft of hair on breast, 70.

—, naked skin on head, 158.
—, young of, instinctively wild, 265.

Turnip and cabbage, analogous variations of, 125.

Type, unity of, 166, 167.

Types, succession of, in same areas, 310.

Typotherium, 302.

Udders enlarged by use, 8.
—, rudimentary, 397.

Ulex, young leaves of, 388.

Umbelliferæ, flowers and seeds of, 116.
—, outer and inner florets of, 173.

Unity of type, 166, 167.

Uria lacrymans, 72.

Use, effects of, under domestication, 8.
—, effects of, in a state of nature, 108.

Utility, how far important in the construction of each part, 159.

Valenciennes, on fresh-water fish, 344.

Variability of mongrels and hybrids, 259.

Variation, under domestication, 5.
—, caused by reproductive system being affected by conditions of life,
7.
—, under nature, 33.
—, laws of, 106.
—, correlated, 9, 114, 159.

Variations appear at corresponding ages, 10, 67.
—, analogous in distinct species, 124.

Varieties, natural, 32.
—, struggle between, 59.
—, domestic, extinction of, 86.
—, transitional, rarity of, 134.
—, when crossed, fertile, 257.
—, when crossed, sterile, 256.
—, classification of, 371.

Verbascum, sterility of, 238.
—, varieties of, crossed, 258.

Verlot, M., on double stocks, 230.

Verneuil, M. de, on the succession of species, 299.

Vibracula of the Polyzoa, 193.

Viola, small imperfect flowers of, 173.
—, tricolor, 57.

Virchow, on the structure of the crystalline lens, 145.

Virginia, pigs of, 66.

Volcanic islands, denudation of, 268.

Vulture, naked skin on head, 158.

Wading-birds, 375.

Wagner, Dr., on Cecidomyia, 387.

Wagner, Moritz, on the importance of isolation, 81.

Wallace, Mr., on origin of species, 1.
—, on the limit of variation under domestication, 31.
—, on dimorphic lepidoptera, 36, 232.
—, on races in the Malay Archipelago, 37.
—, on the improvement of the eye, 145.
—, on the walking-stick insect, 182.
—, on laws of geographical distribution, 322.
—, on the Malay Archipelago, 351.
—, on mimetic animals, 377.

Walsh, Mr. B.D., on phytophagic forms, 38.
—, on equal variability, 125.

Water, fresh, productions of, 343.

Water-hen, 143.

Waterhouse, Mr., on Australian marsupials, 90.
—, on greatly developed parts being variable, 119.
—, on the cells of bees, 220.
—, on general affinities, 379.

Water-ouzel, 142.

Watson, Mr. H.C., on range of varieties of British plants, 37, 46.
—, on acclimatisation, 112.
—, on flora of Azores, 328.
—, on rarity of intermediate varieties, 136.
—, on Alpine plants, 331.
—, on convergence, 100.
—, on the indefinite multiplication of species, 101.

Weale, Mr., on locusts transporting seeds, 327.

Web of feet in water-birds, 142.

Weismann, Prof., on the causes of variability, 6.
—, on rudimentary organs, 400.

West Indian islands, mammals of, 352.

Westwood, on species in large genera being closely allied to others,
45.
—, on the tarsi of Engidæ, 124.
—, on the antennæ of hymenopterous insects, 366.

Whales, 182.

Wheat, varieties of, 88.

White Mountains, flora of, 330.

Whittaker, Mr., on lines of escarpment, 267.

Wichura, Max, on hybrids, 249, 251, 260.

Wings, reduction of size, 109.
—, of insects homologous with branchiæ, 148.
—, rudimentary, in insects, 397.

Wolf crossed with dog, 210.
—, of Falkland Isles, 351.

Wollaston, Mr., on varieties of insects, 38.
—, on fossil varieties of shells in Madeira, 42.
—, on colours of insects on sea-shore, 107.
—, on wingless beetles, 109.
—, on rarity of intermediate varieties, 136.
—, on insular insects, 347.
—, on land-shells of Madeira naturalised, 357.

Wolves, varieties of, 71.

Woodcock with earth attached to leg, 328.

Woodpecker, habits of, 141.
—, green colour of, 158.

Woodward, Mr., on the duration of specific forms, 276.
—, on Pyrgoma, 284.
—, on the continuous succession of genera, 293.
—, on the succession of types, 311.

World, species changing simultaneously throughout, 297.

Wrens, nest of, 234.

Wright, Mr. Chauncey, on the giraffe, 178.
—, on abrupt modifications, 203.

Wyman, Prof., on correlation of colour and effects of poison, 9.
—, on the cells of the bee, 22.

Youatt, Mr., on selection, 23.
—, on sub-breeds of sheep, 26.
—, on rudimentary horns in young cattle, 400.

Zanthoxylon, 174.

Zebra, stripes on, 128.

Zeuglodon, 302.

[Illustration]

The Critique of Pure Reason

By Immanuel Kant

Translated by J. M. D. Meiklejohn

Contents

 Preface to the First Edition (1781)

 Preface to the Second Edition (1787)

 Introduction

 I. Of the difference between Pure and Empirical Knowledge

 II. The Human Intellect, even in an Unphilosophical State, is in
 Possession of Certain Cognitions “à priori”.

 III. Philosophy stands in need of a Science which shall Determine the
 Possibility, Principles, and Extent of Human Knowledge “à priori”

 IV. Of the Difference Between Analytical and Synthetical Judgements.

 V. In all Theoretical Sciences of Reason, Synthetical Judgements “à
 priori” are contained as Principles.

 VI. The Universal Problem of Pure Reason.

 VII. Idea and Division of a Particular Science, under the Name of a
 Critique of Pure Reason.

 I. Transcendental Doctrine of Elements

 First Part—TRANSCENDENTAL ÆSTHETIC

 § 1. Introductory

 SECTION I. OF SPACE

 § 2. Metaphysical Exposition of this Conception.

 § 3. Transcendental Exposition of the Conception of Space.

 § 4. Conclusions from the foregoing Conceptions.

 SECTION II. OF TIME

 § 5. Metaphysical Exposition of this Conception.

 § 6. Transcendental Exposition of the Conception of Time.

 § 7. Conclusions from the above Conceptions.

 § 8. Elucidation.

 § 9. General Remarks on Transcendental Æsthetic.

 § 10. Conclusion of the Transcendental Æsthetic.

 Second Part—TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC

 Introduction. Idea of a Transcendental Logic

 I. Of Logic in General

 II. Of Transcendental Logic

 III. Of the Division of General Logic into Analytic and Dialectic

 IV. Of the Division of Transcendental Logic into Transcendental
 Analytic and Dialectic

 FIRST DIVISION—TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC

 BOOK I. Analytic of Conceptions. § 2

 Chapter I. Of the Transcendental Clue to the Discovery of all Pure
 Conceptions of the Understanding

 Introductory § 3

 Section I. Of the Logical Use of the Understanding in General. § 4

 Section II. Of the Logical Function of the Understanding in
 Judgements. § 5

 Section III. Of the Pure Conceptions of the Understanding, or
 Categories. § 6

 Chapter II. Of the Deduction of the Pure Conception of the
 Understanding

 Section I. Of the Principles of a Transcendental Deduction in general
 § 9

 Transition to the Transcendental Deduction of the Categories. § 10

 Section II Transcendental Deduction of the pure Conceptions of the
 Understanding.

 Of the Possibility of a Conjunction of the manifold representations
 given by Sense. § 11.

 Of the Originally Synthetical Unity of Apperception. § 12

 The Principle of the Synthetical Unity of Apperception is the highest
 Principle of all exercise of the Understanding. § 13

 What Objective Unity of Self-consciousness is. § 14

 The Logical Form of all Judgements consists in the Objective Unity of
 Apperception of the Conceptions contained therein. § 15

 All Sensuous Intuitions are subject to the Categories, as Conditions
 under which alone the manifold Content of them can be united in one
 Consciousness. § 16

 Observation. § 17

 In Cognition, its Application to Objects of Experience is the only
 legitimate use of the Category. § 18

 Of the Application of the Categories to Objects of the Senses in
 general. § 20

 Transcendental Deduction of the universally possible employment in
 experience of the Pure Conceptions of the Understanding. § 22

 Result of this Deduction of the Conceptions of the Understanding. § 23

 BOOK II. Analytic of Principles

 INTRODUCTION. Of the Transcendental Faculty of judgement in General.

 TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF THE FACULTY OF JUDGEMENT OR, ANALYTIC OF
 PRINCIPLES.

 Chapter I. Of the Schematism at of the Pure Conceptions of the
 Understanding.

 Chapter II. System of all Principles of the Pure Understanding.

 Section I. Of the Supreme Principle of all Analytical Judgements.

 Section II. Of the Supreme Principle of all Synthetical Judgements.

 Section III. Systematic Representation of all Synthetical Principles
 of the Pure Understanding.

 Chapter III Of the Ground of the Division of all Objects into
 Phenomena and Noumena.

 APPENDIX.

 SECOND DIVISION—TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC

 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC. INTRODUCTION.

 I. Of Transcendental Illusory Appearance.

 II. Of Pure Reason as the Seat of Transcendental Illusory Appearance.

 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC—BOOK I—OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF PURE REASON.

 Section I—Of Ideas in General.

 Section II. Of Transcendental Ideas.

 Section III. System of Transcendental Ideas.

 TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC—BOOK II—OF THE DIALECTICAL PROCEDURE OF PURE
 REASON.

 Chapter I. Of the Paralogisms of Pure Reason.

 Chapter II. The Antinomy of Pure Reason.

 Section I. System of Cosmological Ideas.

 Section II. Antithetic of Pure Reason.

 Section III. Of the Interest of Reason in these Self-contradictions.

 Section IV. Of the necessity imposed upon Pure Reason of presenting a
 Solution of its Transcendental Problems.

 Section V. Sceptical Exposition of the Cosmological Problems presented
 in the four Transcendental Ideas.

 Section VI. Transcendental Idealism as the Key to the Solution of Pure
 Cosmological Dialectic.

 Section VII. Critical Solution of the Cosmological Problem.

 Section VIII. Regulative Principle of Pure Reason in relation to the
 Cosmological Ideas.

 Section IX. Of the Empirical Use of the Regulative Principle of Reason
 with regard to the Cosmological Ideas.

 I. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the
 Composition of Phenomena in the Universe.

 II. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the Division
 of a Whole given in Intuition.

 III. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the
 Deduction of Cosmical Events from their Causes.

 IV. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the
 Dependence of Phenomenal Existences.

 Chapter III. The Ideal of Pure Reason.

 Section I. Of the Ideal in General.

 Section II. Of the Transcendental Ideal (Prototypon Trancendentale).

 Section III. Of the Arguments employed by Speculative Reason in Proof
 of the Existence of a Supreme Being.

 Section IV. Of the Impossibility of an Ontological Proof of the
 Existence of God.

 Section V. Of the Impossibility of a Cosmological Proof of the
 Existence of God.

 Section VI. Of the Impossibility of a Physico-Theological Proof.

 Section VII. Critique of all Theology based upon Speculative
 Principles of Reason.

 Appendix. Of the Regulative Employment of the Ideas of Pure Reason.

 II. Transcendental Doctrine of Method

 Chapter I. The Discipline of Pure Reason.

 Section I. The Discipline of Pure Reason in the Sphere of Dogmatism.

 Section II. The Discipline of Pure Reason in Polemics.

 Section III. The Discipline of Pure Reason in Hypothesis.

 Section IV. The Discipline of Pure Reason in Relation to Proofs.

 Chapter II. The Canon of Pure Reason.

 Section I. Of the Ultimate End of the Pure Use of Reason.

 Section II. Of the Ideal of the Summum Bonum as a Determining Ground
 of the Ultimate End of Pure Reason.

 Section III. Of Opinion, Knowledge, and Belief.

 Chapter III. The Architectonic of Pure Reason.

 Chapter IV. The History of Pure Reason.

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 1781

Human reason, in one sphere of its cognition, is called upon to
consider questions, which it cannot decline, as they are presented by
its own nature, but which it cannot answer, as they transcend every
faculty of the mind.

It falls into this difficulty without any fault of its own. It begins
with principles, which cannot be dispensed with in the field of
experience, and the truth and sufficiency of which are, at the same
time, insured by experience. With these principles it rises, in
obedience to the laws of its own nature, to ever higher and more remote
conditions. But it quickly discovers that, in this way, its labours
must remain ever incomplete, because new questions never cease to
present themselves; and thus it finds itself compelled to have recourse
to principles which transcend the region of experience, while they are
regarded by common sense without distrust. It thus falls into confusion
and contradictions, from which it conjectures the presence of latent
errors, which, however, it is unable to discover, because the
principles it employs, transcending the limits of experience, cannot be
tested by that criterion. The arena of these endless contests is called
_Metaphysic_.

Time was, when she was the _queen_ of all the sciences; and, if we take
the will for the deed, she certainly deserves, so far as regards the
high importance of her object-matter, this title of honour. Now, it is
the fashion of the time to heap contempt and scorn upon her; and the
matron mourns, forlorn and forsaken, like Hecuba:

Modo maxima rerum,
Tot generis, natisque potens...
Nunc trahor exul, inops.
—Ovid, Metamorphoses. xiii

At first, her government, under the administration of the _dogmatists_,
was an absolute _despotism_. But, as the legislative continued to show
traces of the ancient barbaric rule, her empire gradually broke up, and
intestine wars introduced the reign of _anarchy;_ while the _sceptics_,
like nomadic tribes, who hate a permanent habitation and settled mode
of living, attacked from time to time those who had organized
themselves into civil communities. But their number was, very happily,
small; and thus they could not entirely put a stop to the exertions of
those who persisted in raising new edifices, although on no settled or
uniform plan. In recent times the hope dawned upon us of seeing those
disputes settled, and the legitimacy of her claims established by a
kind of _physiology_ of the human understanding—that of the celebrated
Locke. But it was found that—although it was affirmed that this
so-called queen could not refer her descent to any higher source than
that of common experience, a circumstance which necessarily brought
suspicion on her claims—as this _genealogy_ was incorrect, she
persisted in the advancement of her claims to sovereignty. Thus
metaphysics necessarily fell back into the antiquated and rotten
constitution of _dogmatism_, and again became obnoxious to the contempt
from which efforts had been made to save it. At present, as all
methods, according to the general persuasion, have been tried in vain,
there reigns nought but weariness and complete _indifferentism_—the
mother of chaos and night in the scientific world, but at the same time
the source of, or at least the prelude to, the re-creation and
reinstallation of a science, when it has fallen into confusion,
obscurity, and disuse from ill directed effort.

For it is in reality vain to profess _indifference_ in regard to such
inquiries, the object of which cannot be indifferent to humanity.
Besides, these pretended _indifferentists_, however much they may try
to disguise themselves by the assumption of a popular style and by
changes on the language of the schools, unavoidably fall into
metaphysical declarations and propositions, which they profess to
regard with so much contempt. At the same time, this indifference,
which has arisen in the world of science, and which relates to that
kind of knowledge which we should wish to see destroyed the last, is a
phenomenon that well deserves our attention and reflection. It is
plainly not the effect of the levity, but of the matured _judgement_[1]
of the age, which refuses to be any longer entertained with illusory
knowledge, It is, in fact, a call to reason, again to undertake the
most laborious of all tasks—that of self-examination, and to establish
a tribunal, which may secure it in its well-grounded claims, while it
pronounces against all baseless assumptions and pretensions, not in an
arbitrary manner, but according to its own eternal and unchangeable
laws. This tribunal is nothing less than the _Critical Investigation of
Pure Reason_.

 [1] We very often hear complaints of the shallowness of the present
 age, and of the decay of profound science. But I do not think that
 those which rest upon a secure foundation, such as mathematics,
 physical science, etc., in the least deserve this reproach, but that
 they rather maintain their ancient fame, and in the latter case,
 indeed, far surpass it. The same would be the case with the other
 kinds of cognition, if their principles were but firmly established.
 In the absence of this security, indifference, doubt, and finally,
 severe criticism are rather signs of a profound habit of thought. Our
 age is the age of criticism, to which everything must be subjected.
 The sacredness of religion, and the authority of legislation, are by
 many regarded as grounds of exemption from the examination of this
 tribunal. But, if they are exempted, they become the subjects of just
 suspicion, and cannot lay claim to sincere respect, which reason
 accords only to that which has stood the test of a free and public
 examination.

I do not mean by this a criticism of books and systems, but a critical
inquiry into the faculty of reason, with reference to the cognitions to
which it strives to attain _without the aid of experience;_ in other
words, the solution of the question regarding the possibility or
impossibility of metaphysics, and the determination of the origin, as
well as of the extent and limits of this science. All this must be done
on the basis of principles.

This path—the only one now remaining—has been entered upon by me; and I
flatter myself that I have, in this way, discovered the cause of—and
consequently the mode of removing—all the errors which have hitherto
set reason at variance with itself, in the sphere of non-empirical
thought. I have not returned an evasive answer to the questions of
reason, by alleging the inability and limitation of the faculties of
the mind; I have, on the contrary, examined them completely in the
light of principles, and, after having discovered the cause of the
doubts and contradictions into which reason fell, have solved them to
its perfect satisfaction. It is true, these questions have not been
solved as dogmatism, in its vain fancies and desires, had expected; for
it can only be satisfied by the exercise of magical arts, and of these
I have no knowledge. But neither do these come within the compass of
our mental powers; and it was the duty of philosophy to destroy the
illusions which had their origin in misconceptions, whatever darling
hopes and valued expectations may be ruined by its explanations. My
chief aim in this work has been thoroughness; and I make bold to say
that there is not a single metaphysical problem that does not find its
solution, or at least the key to its solution, here. Pure reason is a
perfect unity; and therefore, if the principle presented by it prove to
be insufficient for the solution of even a single one of those
questions to which the very nature of reason gives birth, we must
reject it, as we could not be perfectly certain of its sufficiency in
the case of the others.

While I say this, I think I see upon the countenance of the reader
signs of dissatisfaction mingled with contempt, when he hears
declarations which sound so boastful and extravagant; and yet they are
beyond comparison more moderate than those advanced by the commonest
author of the commonest philosophical programme, in which the dogmatist
professes to demonstrate the simple nature of the soul, or the
necessity of a primal being. Such a dogmatist promises to extend human
knowledge beyond the limits of possible experience; while I humbly
confess that this is completely beyond my power. Instead of any such
attempt, I confine myself to the examination of reason alone and its
pure thought; and I do not need to seek far for the sum-total of its
cognition, because it has its seat in my own mind. Besides, common
logic presents me with a complete and systematic catalogue of all the
simple operations of reason; and it is my task to answer the question
how far reason can go, without the material presented and the aid
furnished by experience.

So much for the completeness and thoroughness necessary in the
execution of the present task. The aims set before us are not
arbitrarily proposed, but are imposed upon us by the nature of
cognition itself.

The above remarks relate to the _matter_ of our critical inquiry. As
regards the _form_, there are two indispensable conditions, which any
one who undertakes so difficult a task as that of a critique of pure
reason, is bound to fulfil. These conditions are _certitude_ and
_clearness_.

As regards _certitude_, I have fully convinced myself that, in this
sphere of thought, _opinion_ is perfectly inadmissible, and that
everything which bears the least semblance of an hypothesis must be
excluded, as of no value in such discussions. For it is a necessary
condition of every cognition that is to be established upon _à priori_
grounds that it shall be held to be absolutely necessary; much more is
this the case with an attempt to determine all pure _à priori_
cognition, and to furnish the standard—and consequently an example—of
all apodeictic (philosophical) certitude. Whether I have succeeded in
what I professed to do, it is for the reader to determine; it is the
author’s business merely to adduce grounds and reasons, without
determining what influence these ought to have on the mind of his
judges. But, lest anything he may have said may become the innocent
cause of doubt in their minds, or tend to weaken the effect which his
arguments might otherwise produce—he may be allowed to point out those
passages which may occasion mistrust or difficulty, although these do
not concern the main purpose of the present work. He does this solely
with the view of removing from the mind of the reader any doubts which
might affect his judgement of the work as a whole, and in regard to its
ultimate aim.

I know no investigations more necessary for a full insight into the
nature of the faculty which we call _understanding_, and at the same
time for the determination of the rules and limits of its use, than
those undertaken in the second chapter of the “Transcendental
Analytic,” under the title of _Deduction of the Pure Conceptions of the
Understanding;_ and they have also cost me by far the greatest
labour—labour which, I hope, will not remain uncompensated. The view
there taken, which goes somewhat deeply into the subject, has two
sides. The one relates to the objects of the pure understanding, and is
intended to demonstrate and to render comprehensible the objective
validity of its _à priori_ conceptions; and it forms for this reason an
essential part of the Critique. The other considers the pure
understanding itself, its possibility and its powers of cognition—that
is, from a subjective point of view; and, although this exposition is
of great importance, it does not belong essentially to the main purpose
of the work, because the grand question is what and how much can reason
and understanding, apart from experience, cognize, and not, how is the
_faculty of thought_ itself possible? As the latter is an inquiry into
the cause of a given effect, and has thus in it some semblance of an
hypothesis (although, as I shall show on another occasion, this is
really not the fact), it would seem that, in the present instance, I
had allowed myself to enounce a mere _opinion_, and that the reader
must therefore be at liberty to hold a different _opinion_. But I beg
to remind him that, if my subjective deduction does not produce in his
mind the conviction of its certitude at which I aimed, the objective
deduction, with which alone the present work is properly concerned, is
in every respect satisfactory.

As regards _clearness_, the reader has a right to demand, in the first
place, _discursive_ or logical clearness, that is, on the basis of
conceptions, and, secondly, _intuitive_ or æsthetic clearness, by means
of intuitions, that is, by examples or other modes of illustration _in
concreto_. I have done what I could for the first kind of
intelligibility. This was essential to my purpose; and it thus became
the accidental cause of my inability to do complete justice to the
second requirement. I have been almost always at a loss, during the
progress of this work, how to settle this question. Examples and
illustrations always appeared to me necessary, and, in the first sketch
of the Critique, naturally fell into their proper places. But I very
soon became aware of the magnitude of my task, and the numerous
problems with which I should be engaged; and, as I perceived that this
critical investigation would, even if delivered in the driest
_scholastic_ manner, be far from being brief, I found it unadvisable to
enlarge it still more with examples and explanations, which are
necessary only from a _popular_ point of view. I was induced to take
this course from the consideration also that the present work is not
intended for popular use, that those devoted to science do not require
such helps, although they are always acceptable, and that they would
have materially interfered with my present purpose. Abbé Terrasson
remarks with great justice that, if we estimate the size of a work, not
from the number of its pages, but from the time which we require to
make ourselves master of it, it may be said of many a book—_that it
would be much shorter, if it were not so short_. On the other hand, as
regards the comprehensibility of a system of speculative cognition,
connected under a single principle, we may say with equal justice: many
a book would have been much clearer, if it had not been intended to be
so very clear. For explanations and examples, and other helps to
intelligibility, aid us in the comprehension of _parts_, but they
distract the attention, dissipate the mental power of the reader, and
stand in the way of his forming a clear conception of the _whole;_ as
he cannot attain soon enough to a survey of the system, and the
colouring and embellishments bestowed upon it prevent his observing its
articulation or organization—which is the most important consideration
with him, when he comes to judge of its unity and stability.

The reader must naturally have a strong inducement to co-operate with
the present author, if he has formed the intention of erecting a
complete and solid edifice of metaphysical science, according to the
plan now laid before him. Metaphysics, as here represented, is the only
science which admits of completion—and with little labour, if it is
united, in a short time; so that nothing will be left to future
generations except the task of illustrating and applying it
_didactically_. For this science is nothing more than the inventory of
all that is given us by _pure reason_, systematically arranged. Nothing
can escape our notice; for what reason produces from itself cannot lie
concealed, but must be brought to the light by reason itself, so soon
as we have discovered the common principle of the ideas we seek. The
perfect unity of this kind of cognitions, which are based upon pure
conceptions, and uninfluenced by any empirical element, or any peculiar
intuition leading to determinate experience, renders this completeness
not only practicable, but also necessary.

Tecum habita, et nôris quam sit tibi curta supellex.
—Persius. Satirae iv. 52.

Such a system of pure speculative reason I hope to be able to publish
under the title of _Metaphysic of Nature_[2]. The content of this work
(which will not be half so long) will be very much richer than that of
the present Critique, which has to discover the sources of this
cognition and expose the conditions of its possibility, and at the same
time to clear and level a fit foundation for the scientific edifice. In
the present work, I look for the patient hearing and the impartiality
of a _judge;_ in the other, for the good-will and assistance of a
_co-labourer_. For, however complete the list of _principles_ for this
system may be in the Critique, the correctness of the system requires
that no _deduced_ conceptions should be absent. These cannot be
presented _à priori_, but must be gradually discovered; and, while the
_synthesis_ of conceptions has been fully exhausted in the Critique, it
is necessary that, in the proposed work, the same should be the case
with their _analysis_. But this will be rather an amusement than a
labour.

 [2] In contradistinction to the Metaphysic of Ethics. This work was
 never published.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 1787

Whether the treatment of that portion of our knowledge which lies
within the province of pure reason advances with that undeviating
certainty which characterizes the progress of _science_, we shall be at
no loss to determine. If we find those who are engaged in metaphysical
pursuits, unable to come to an understanding as to the method which
they ought to follow; if we find them, after the most elaborate
preparations, invariably brought to a stand before the goal is reached,
and compelled to retrace their steps and strike into fresh paths, we
may then feel quite sure that they are far from having attained to the
certainty of scientific progress and may rather be said to be merely
groping about in the dark. In these circumstances we shall render an
important service to reason if we succeed in simply indicating the path
along which it must travel, in order to arrive at any results—even if
it should be found necessary to abandon many of those aims which,
without reflection, have been proposed for its attainment.

That _Logic_ has advanced in this sure course, even from the earliest
times, is apparent from the fact that, since Aristotle, it has been
unable to advance a step and, thus, to all appearance has reached its
completion. For, if some of the moderns have thought to enlarge its
domain by introducing _psychological_ discussions on the mental
faculties, such as imagination and wit, _metaphysical_, discussions on
the origin of knowledge and the different kinds of certitude, according
to the difference of the objects (idealism, scepticism, and so on), or
_anthropological_ discussions on prejudices, their causes and remedies:
this attempt, on the part of these authors, only shows their ignorance
of the peculiar nature of logical science. We do not enlarge but
disfigure the sciences when we lose sight of their respective limits
and allow them to run into one another. Now logic is enclosed within
limits which admit of perfectly clear definition; it is a science which
has for its object nothing but the exposition and proof of the _formal_
laws of all thought, whether it be _à priori_ or empirical, whatever be
its origin or its object, and whatever the difficulties—natural or
accidental—which it encounters in the human mind.

The early success of logic must be attributed exclusively to the
narrowness of its field, in which abstraction may, or rather must, be
made of all the objects of cognition with their characteristic
distinctions, and in which the understanding has only to deal with
itself and with its own forms. It is, obviously, a much more difficult
task for reason to strike into the sure path of science, where it has
to deal not simply with itself, but with objects external to itself.
Hence, logic is properly only a _propædeutic_—forms, as it were, the
vestibule of the sciences; and while it is necessary to enable us to
form a correct judgement with regard to the various branches of
knowledge, still the acquisition of real, substantive knowledge is to
be sought only in the sciences properly so called, that is, in the
objective sciences.

Now these sciences, if they can be termed rational at all, must contain
elements of _à priori_ cognition, and this cognition may stand in a
twofold relation to its object. Either it may have to _determine_ the
conception of the object—which must be supplied extraneously, or it may
have to _establish its reality_. The former is _theoretical_, the
latter _practical_, rational cognition. In both, the _pure_ or _à
priori_ element must be treated first, and must be carefully
distinguished from that which is supplied from other sources. Any other
method can only lead to irremediable confusion.

_Mathematics_ and _physics_ are the two theoretical sciences which have
to determine their objects _à priori_. The former is purely _à priori_,
the latter is partially so, but is also dependent on other sources of
cognition.

In the earliest times of which history affords us any record,
_mathematics_ had already entered on the sure course of science, among
that wonderful nation, the Greeks. Still it is not to be supposed that
it was as easy for this science to strike into, or rather to construct
for itself, that royal road, as it was for logic, in which reason has
only to deal with itself. On the contrary, I believe that it must have
remained long—chiefly among the Egyptians—in the stage of blind groping
after its true aims and destination, and that it was revolutionized by
the happy idea of one man, who struck out and determined for all time
the path which this science must follow, and which admits of an
indefinite advancement. The history of this intellectual
revolution—much more important in its results than the discovery of the
passage round the celebrated Cape of Good Hope—and of its author, has
not been preserved. But Diogenes Laertius, in naming the supposed
discoverer of some of the simplest elements of geometrical
demonstration—elements which, according to the ordinary opinion, do not
even require to be proved—makes it apparent that the change introduced
by the first indication of this new path, must have seemed of the
utmost importance to the mathematicians of that age, and it has thus
been secured against the chance of oblivion. A new light must have
flashed on the mind of the first man (_Thales_, or whatever may have
been his name) who demonstrated the properties of the _isosceles_
triangle. For he found that it was not sufficient to meditate on the
figure, as it lay before his eyes, or the conception of it, as it
existed in his mind, and thus endeavour to get at the knowledge of its
properties, but that it was necessary to produce these properties, as
it were, by a positive _à priori construction;_ and that, in order to
arrive with certainty at _à priori_ cognition, he must not attribute to
the object any other properties than those which necessarily followed
from that which he had himself, in accordance with his conception,
placed in the object.

A much longer period elapsed before _Physics_ entered on the highway of
science. For it is only about a century and a half since the wise BACON
gave a new direction to physical studies, or rather—as others were
already on the right track—imparted fresh vigour to the pursuit of this
new direction. Here, too, as in the case of mathematics, we find
evidence of a rapid intellectual revolution. In the remarks which
follow I shall confine myself to the _empirical_ side of natural
science.

When GALILEI experimented with balls of a definite weight on the
inclined plane, when TORRICELLI caused the air to sustain a weight
which he had calculated beforehand to be equal to that of a definite
column of water, or when STAHL, at a later period, converted metals
into lime, and reconverted lime into metal, by the addition and
subtraction of certain elements;[3] a light broke upon all natural
philosophers. They learned that reason only perceives that which it
produces after its own design; that it must not be content to follow,
as it were, in the leading-strings of nature, but must proceed in
advance with principles of judgement according to unvarying laws, and
compel nature to reply its questions. For accidental observations, made
according to no preconceived plan, cannot be united under a necessary
law. But it is this that reason seeks for and requires. It is only the
principles of reason which can give to concordant phenomena the
validity of laws, and it is only when experiment is directed by these
rational principles that it can have any real utility. Reason must
approach nature with the view, indeed, of receiving information from
it, not, however, in the character of a pupil, who listens to all that
his master chooses to tell him, but in that of a judge, who compels the
witnesses to reply to those questions which he himself thinks fit to
propose. To this single idea must the revolution be ascribed, by which,
after groping in the dark for so many centuries, natural science was at
length conducted into the path of certain progress.

 [3] I do not here follow with exactness the history of the
 experimental method, of which, indeed, the first steps are involved in
 some obscurity.

We come now to _metaphysics_, a purely speculative science, which
occupies a completely isolated position and is entirely independent of
the teachings of experience. It deals with mere conceptions—not, like
mathematics, with conceptions applied to intuition—and in it, reason is
the pupil of itself alone. It is the oldest of the sciences, and would
still survive, even if all the rest were swallowed up in the abyss of
an all-destroying barbarism. But it has not yet had the good fortune to
attain to the sure scientific method. This will be apparent; if we
apply the tests which we proposed at the outset. We find that reason
perpetually comes to a stand, when it attempts to gain _à priori_ the
perception even of those laws which the most common experience
confirms. We find it compelled to retrace its steps in innumerable
instances, and to abandon the path on which it had entered, because
this does not lead to the desired result. We find, too, that those who
are engaged in metaphysical pursuits are far from being able to agree
among themselves, but that, on the contrary, this science appears to
furnish an arena specially adapted for the display of skill or the
exercise of strength in mock-contests—a field in which no combatant
ever yet succeeded in gaining an inch of ground, in which, at least, no
victory was ever yet crowned with permanent possession.

This leads us to inquire why it is that, in metaphysics, the sure path
of science has not hitherto been found. Shall we suppose that it is
impossible to discover it? Why then should nature have visited our
reason with restless aspirations after it, as if it were one of our
weightiest concerns? Nay, more, how little cause should we have to
place confidence in our reason, if it abandons us in a matter about
which, most of all, we desire to know the truth—and not only so, but
even allures us to the pursuit of vain phantoms, only to betray us in
the end? Or, if the path has only hitherto been missed, what
indications do we possess to guide us in a renewed investigation, and
to enable us to hope for greater success than has fallen to the lot of
our predecessors?

It appears to me that the examples of mathematics and natural
philosophy, which, as we have seen, were brought into their present
condition by a sudden revolution, are sufficiently remarkable to fix
our attention on the essential circumstances of the change which has
proved so advantageous to them, and to induce us to make the experiment
of imitating them, so far as the analogy which, as rational sciences,
they bear to metaphysics may permit. It has hitherto been assumed that
our cognition must conform to the objects; but all attempts to
ascertain anything about these objects _à priori_, by means of
conceptions, and thus to extend the range of our knowledge, have been
rendered abortive by this assumption. Let us then make the experiment
whether we may not be more successful in metaphysics, if we assume that
the objects must conform to our cognition. This appears, at all events,
to accord better with the _possibility_ of our gaining the end we have
in view, that is to say, of arriving at the cognition of objects _à
priori_, of determining something with respect to these objects, before
they are given to us. We here propose to do just what COPERNICUS did in
attempting to explain the celestial movements. When he found that he
could make no progress by assuming that all the heavenly bodies
revolved round the spectator, he reversed the process, and tried the
experiment of assuming that the spectator revolved, while the stars
remained at rest. We may make the same experiment with regard to the
intuition of objects. If the intuition must conform to the nature of
the objects, I do not see how we can know anything of them _à priori_.
If, on the other hand, the object conforms to the nature of our faculty
of intuition, I can then easily conceive the possibility of such an _à
priori_ knowledge. Now as I cannot rest in the mere intuitions, but—if
they are to become cognitions—must refer them, as _representations_, to
something, as _object_, and must determine the latter by means of the
former, here again there are two courses open to me. _Either_, first, I
may assume that the conceptions, by which I effect this determination,
conform to the object—and in this case I am reduced to the same
perplexity as before; _or_ secondly, I may assume that the objects, or,
which is the same thing, that _experience_, in which alone as given
objects they are cognized, conform to my conceptions—and then I am at
no loss how to proceed. For experience itself is a mode of cognition
which requires understanding. Before objects, are given to me, that is,
_à priori_, I must presuppose in myself laws of the understanding which
are expressed in conceptions _à priori_. To these conceptions, then,
all the objects of experience must necessarily conform. Now there are
objects which reason _thinks_, and that necessarily, but which cannot
be given in experience, or, at least, cannot be given _so_ as reason
thinks them. The attempt to think these objects will hereafter furnish
an excellent test of the new method of thought which we have adopted,
and which is based on the principle that we only cognize in things _à
priori_ that which we ourselves place in them.[4]

 [4] This method, accordingly, which we have borrowed from the natural
 philosopher, consists in seeking for the elements of pure reason in
 that _which admits of confirmation or refutation by experiment_. Now
 the propositions of pure reason, especially when they transcend the
 limits of possible experience, do not admit of our making any
 experiment with their _objects_, as in natural science. Hence, with
 regard to those _conceptions_ and _principles_ which we assume _à
 priori_, our only course will be to view them from two different
 sides. We must regard one and the same conception, _on the one hand_,
 in relation to experience as an object of the senses and of the
 understanding, _on the other hand_, in relation to reason, isolated
 and transcending the limits of experience, as an object of mere
 thought. Now if we find that, when we regard things from this double
 point of view, the result is in harmony with the principle of pure
 reason, but that, when we regard them from a single point of view,
 reason is involved in self-contradiction, then the experiment will
 establish the correctness of this distinction.

This attempt succeeds as well as we could desire, and promises to
metaphysics, in its first part—that is, where it is occupied with
conceptions _à priori_, of which the corresponding objects may be given
in experience—the certain course of science. For by this new method we
are enabled perfectly to explain the possibility of _à priori_
cognition, and, what is more, to demonstrate satisfactorily the laws
which lie _à priori_ at the foundation of nature, as the sum of the
objects of experience—neither of which was possible according to the
procedure hitherto followed. But from this deduction of the faculty of
_à priori_ cognition in the first part of metaphysics, we derive a
surprising result, and one which, to all appearance, militates against
the great end of metaphysics, as treated in the second part. For we
come to the conclusion that our faculty of cognition is unable to
transcend the limits of possible experience; and yet this is precisely
the most essential object of this science. The estimate of our rational
cognition _à priori_ at which we arrive is that it has only to do with
phenomena, and that things in themselves, while possessing a real
existence, lie beyond its sphere. Here we are enabled to put the
justice of this estimate to the test. For that which of necessity
impels us to transcend the limits of experience and of all phenomena is
the _unconditioned_, which reason absolutely requires in things as they
are in themselves, in order to complete the series of conditions. Now,
if it appears that when, on the one hand, we assume that our cognition
conforms to its objects as things in themselves, _the unconditioned
cannot be thought without contradiction_, and that when, on the other
hand, we assume that our representation of things as they are given to
us, does not conform to these things as they are in themselves, but
that these objects, as phenomena, conform to our mode of
representation, _the contradiction disappears:_ we shall then be
convinced of the truth of that which we began by assuming for the sake
of experiment; we may look upon it as established that the
unconditioned does not lie in things as we know them, or as they are
given to us, but in things as they are in themselves, beyond the range
of our cognition.[5]

 [5] This experiment of pure reason has a great similarity to that of
 the _Chemists_, which they term the experiment of _reduction_, or,
 more usually, the _synthetic_ process. The _analysis_ of the
 metaphysician separates pure cognition _à priori_ into two
 heterogeneous elements, viz., the cognition of things as phenomena,
 and of things in themselves. _Dialectic_ combines these again into
 harmony with the necessary rational idea of the unconditioned, and
 finds that this harmony never results except through the above
 distinction, which is, therefore, concluded to be just.

But, after we have thus denied the power of speculative reason to make
any progress in the sphere of the supersensible, it still remains for
our consideration whether data do not exist in _practical_ cognition
which may enable us to determine the transcendent conception of the
unconditioned, to rise beyond the limits of all possible experience
from a _practical_ point of view, and thus to satisfy the great ends of
metaphysics. Speculative reason has thus, at least, made room for such
an extension of our knowledge: and, if it must leave this space vacant,
still it does not rob us of the liberty to fill it up, if we can, by
means of practical data—nay, it even challenges us to make the
attempt.[6]

 [6] So the central laws of the movements of the heavenly bodies
 established the truth of that which Copernicus, first, assumed only as
 a hypothesis, and, at the same time, brought to light that invisible
 force (Newtonian attraction) which holds the universe together. The
 latter would have remained forever undiscovered, if Copernicus had not
 ventured on the experiment—contrary to the senses but still just—of
 looking for the observed movements not in the heavenly bodies, but in
 the spectator. In this Preface I treat the new metaphysical method as
 a hypothesis with the view of rendering apparent the first attempts at
 such a change of method, which are always hypothetical. But in the
 Critique itself it will be demonstrated, not hypothetically, but
 apodeictically, from the nature of our representations of space and
 time, and from the elementary conceptions of the understanding.

This attempt to introduce a complete revolution in the procedure of
metaphysics, after the _example_ of the geometricians and natural
philosophers, constitutes the aim of the Critique of Pure Speculative
Reason. It is a treatise on the method to be followed, not a system of
the science itself. But, at the same time, it marks out and defines
both the external boundaries and the internal structure of this
science. For pure speculative reason has this peculiarity, that, in
choosing the various objects of thought, it is able to define the
limits of its own faculties, and even to give a complete enumeration of
the possible modes of proposing problems to itself, and thus to sketch
out the entire system of metaphysics. For, on the one hand, in
cognition _à priori_, nothing must be attributed to the objects but
what the thinking subject derives from itself; and, on the other hand,
reason is, in regard to the principles of cognition, a perfectly
distinct, independent unity, in which, as in an organized body, every
member exists for the sake of the others, and all for the sake of each,
so that no principle can be viewed, with safety, in one relationship,
unless it is, at the same time, viewed in relation to the total use of
pure reason. Hence, too, metaphysics has this singular advantage—an
advantage which falls to the lot of no other science which has to do
with _objects_—that, if once it is conducted into the sure path of
science, by means of this criticism, it can then take in the whole
sphere of its cognitions, and can thus complete its work, and leave it
for the use of posterity, as a capital which can never receive fresh
accessions. For metaphysics has to deal only with principles and with
the limitations of its own employment as determined by these
principles. To this perfection it is, therefore, bound, as the
fundamental science, to attain, and to it the maxim may justly be
applied:

 Nil actum reputans, si quid superesset agendum.

But, it will be asked, what kind of a treasure is this that we propose
to bequeath to posterity? What is the real value of this system of
metaphysics, purified by criticism, and thereby reduced to a permanent
condition? A cursory view of the present work will lead to the
supposition that its use is merely _negative_, that it only serves to
warn us against venturing, with speculative reason, beyond the limits
of experience. This is, in fact, its primary use. But this, at once,
assumes a _positive_ value, when we observe that the principles with
which speculative reason endeavours to transcend its limits lead
inevitably, not to the _extension_, but to the _contraction_ of the use
of reason, inasmuch as they threaten to extend the limits of
sensibility, which is their proper sphere, over the entire realm of
thought and, thus, to supplant the pure (practical) use of reason. So
far, then, as this criticism is occupied in confining speculative
reason within its proper bounds, it is only negative; but, inasmuch as
it thereby, at the same time, removes an obstacle which impedes and
even threatens to destroy the use of practical reason, it possesses a
positive and very important value. In order to admit this, we have only
to be convinced that there is an absolutely necessary use of pure
reason—the moral use—in which it inevitably transcends the limits of
sensibility, without the aid of speculation, requiring only to be
insured against the effects of a speculation which would involve it in
contradiction with itself. To deny the positive advantage of the
service which this criticism renders us would be as absurd as to
maintain that the system of police is productive of no positive
benefit, since its main business is to prevent the violence which
citizen has to apprehend from citizen, that so each may pursue his
vocation in peace and security. That space and time are only forms of
sensible intuition, and hence are only conditions of the existence of
things as phenomena; that, moreover, we have no conceptions of the
understanding, and, consequently, no elements for the cognition of
things, except in so far as a corresponding intuition can be given to
these conceptions; that, accordingly, we can have no cognition of an
object, as a thing in itself, but only as an object of sensible
intuition, that is, as phenomenon—all this is proved in the analytical
part of the Critique; and from this the limitation of all possible
speculative cognition to the mere objects of _experience_, follows as a
necessary result. At the same time, it must be carefully borne in mind
that, while we surrender the power of _cognizing_, we still reserve the
power of _thinking_ objects, as things in themselves.[7] For,
otherwise, we should require to affirm the existence of an appearance,
without something that appears—which would be absurd. Now let us
suppose, for a moment, that we had not undertaken this criticism and,
accordingly, had not drawn the necessary distinction between things as
objects of experience and things as they are in themselves. The
principle of causality, and, by consequence, the mechanism of nature as
determined by causality, would then have absolute validity in relation
to all things as efficient causes. I should then be unable to assert,
with regard to one and the same being, e.g., the human soul, that its
will is _free_, and yet, at the same time, subject to natural
necessity, that is, _not free_, without falling into a palpable
contradiction, for in both propositions I should take the soul in _the
same signification_, as a thing in general, as a thing in itself—as,
without previous criticism, I could not but take it. Suppose now, on
the other hand, that we _have_ undertaken this criticism, and have
learnt that an object may be taken in _two senses_, first, as a
phenomenon, secondly, as a thing in itself; and that, according to the
deduction of the conceptions of the understanding, the principle of
causality has reference only to things in the first sense. We then see
how it does not involve any contradiction to assert, on the one hand,
that the will, in the phenomenal sphere—in visible action—is
necessarily obedient to the law of nature, and, in so far, _not free;_
and, on the other hand, that, as belonging to a thing in itself, it is
not subject to that law, and, accordingly, is _free_. Now, it is true
that I cannot, by means of speculative reason, and still less by
empirical observation, _cognize_ my soul as a thing in itself and
consequently, cannot cognize liberty as the property of a being to
which I ascribe effects in the world of sense. For, to do so, I must
cognize this being as existing, and yet not in time, which—since I
cannot support my conception by any intuition—is impossible. At the
same time, while I cannot _cognize_, I can quite well _think_ freedom,
that is to say, my representation of it involves at least no
contradiction, if we bear in mind the critical distinction of the two
modes of representation (the sensible and the intellectual) and the
consequent limitation of the conceptions of the pure understanding and
of the principles which flow from them. Suppose now that morality
necessarily presupposed liberty, in the strictest sense, as a property
of our will; suppose that reason contained certain practical, original
principles _à priori_, which were absolutely impossible without this
presupposition; and suppose, at the same time, that speculative reason
had proved that liberty was incapable of being thought at all. It would
then follow that the moral presupposition must give way to the
speculative affirmation, the opposite of which involves an obvious
contradiction, and that _liberty_ and, with it, morality must yield to
the _mechanism of nature;_ for the negation of morality involves no
contradiction, except on the presupposition of liberty. Now morality
does not require the speculative cognition of liberty; it is enough
that I can think it, that its conception involves no contradiction,
that it does not interfere with the mechanism of nature. But even this
requirement we could not satisfy, if we had not learnt the twofold
sense in which things may be taken; and it is only in this way that the
doctrine of morality and the doctrine of nature are confined within
their proper limits. For this result, then, we are indebted to a
criticism which warns us of our unavoidable ignorance with regard to
things in themselves, and establishes the necessary limitation of our
theoretical _cognition_ to mere phenomena.

 [7] In order to _cognize_ an object, I must be able to prove its
 possibility, either from its reality as attested by experience, or _à
 priori_, by means of reason. But I can _think_ what I please, provided
 only I do not contradict myself; that is, provided my conception is a
 possible thought, though I may be unable to answer for the existence
 of a corresponding object in the sum of possibilities. But something
 more is required before I can attribute to such a conception objective
 validity, that is real possibility—the other possibility being merely
 logical. We are not, however, confined to theoretical sources of
 cognition for the means of satisfying this additional requirement, but
 may derive them from practical sources.

The positive value of the critical principles of pure reason in
relation to the conception of _God_ and of the _simple nature_ of the
_soul_, admits of a similar exemplification; but on this point I shall
not dwell. I cannot even make the assumption—as the practical interests
of morality require—of God, freedom, and immortality, if I do not
deprive speculative reason of its pretensions to transcendent insight.
For to arrive at these, it must make use of principles which, in fact,
extend only to the objects of possible experience, and which cannot be
applied to objects beyond this sphere without converting them into
phenomena, and thus rendering the _practical extension_ of pure reason
impossible. I must, therefore, abolish _knowledge_, to make room for
_belief_. The dogmatism of metaphysics, that is, the presumption that
it is possible to advance in metaphysics without previous criticism, is
the true source of the unbelief (always dogmatic) which militates
against morality.

Thus, while it may be no very difficult task to bequeath a legacy to
posterity, in the shape of a system of metaphysics constructed in
accordance with the Critique of Pure Reason, still the value of such a
bequest is not to be depreciated. It will render an important service
to reason, by substituting the certainty of scientific method for that
random groping after results without the guidance of principles, which
has hitherto characterized the pursuit of metaphysical studies. It will
render an important service to the inquiring mind of youth, by leading
the student to apply his powers to the cultivation of genuine science,
instead of wasting them, as at present, on speculations which can never
lead to any result, or on the idle attempt to invent new ideas and
opinions. But, above all, it will confer an inestimable benefit on
morality and religion, by showing that all the objections urged against
them may be silenced for ever by the _Socratic_ method, that is to say,
by proving the ignorance of the objector. For, as the world has never
been, and, no doubt, never will be without a system of metaphysics of
one kind or another, it is the highest and weightiest concern of
philosophy to render it powerless for harm, by closing up the sources
of error.

This important change in the field of the sciences, this loss of its
fancied possessions, to which speculative reason must submit, does not
prove in any way detrimental to the general interests of humanity. The
advantages which the world has derived from the teachings of pure
reason are not at all impaired. The loss falls, in its whole extent, on
the _monopoly of the schools_, but does not in the slightest degree
touch the _interests of mankind_. I appeal to the most obstinate
dogmatist, whether the proof of the continued existence of the soul
after death, derived from the simplicity of its substance; of the
freedom of the will in opposition to the general mechanism of nature,
drawn from the subtle but impotent distinction of subjective and
objective practical necessity; or of the existence of God, deduced from
the conception of an _ens realissimum_—the contingency of the
changeable, and the necessity of a prime mover, has ever been able to
pass beyond the limits of the schools, to penetrate the public mind, or
to exercise the slightest influence on its convictions. It must be
admitted that this has not been the case and that, owing to the
unfitness of the common understanding for such subtle speculations, it
can never be expected to take place. On the contrary, it is plain that
_the hope of a future life_ arises from the feeling, which exists in
the breast of every man, that the temporal is inadequate to meet and
satisfy the demands of his nature. In like manner, it cannot be doubted
that the clear exhibition of duties in opposition to all the claims of
inclination, gives rise to the consciousness of _freedom_, and that the
glorious order, beauty, and providential care, everywhere displayed in
nature, give rise to the belief in a wise and great Author of the
Universe. Such is the genesis of these general convictions of mankind,
so far as they depend on rational grounds; and this public property not
only remains undisturbed, but is even raised to greater importance, by
the doctrine that the schools have no right to arrogate to themselves a
more profound insight into a matter of general human concernment than
that to which the great mass of men, ever held by us in the highest
estimation, can without difficulty attain, and that the schools should,
therefore, confine themselves to the elaboration of these universally
comprehensible and, from a moral point of view, amply satisfactory
proofs. The change, therefore, affects only the arrogant pretensions of
the schools, which would gladly retain, in their own exclusive
possession, the key to the truths which they impart to the public.

 Quod mecum nescit, solus vult scire videri.

At the same time it does not deprive the speculative philosopher of his
just title to be the sole depositor of a science which benefits the
public without its knowledge—I mean, the Critique of Pure Reason. This
can never become popular and, indeed, has no occasion to be so; for
finespun arguments in favour of useful truths make just as little
impression on the public mind as the equally subtle objections brought
against these truths. On the other hand, since both inevitably force
themselves on every man who rises to the height of speculation, it
becomes the manifest duty of the schools to enter upon a thorough
investigation of the rights of speculative reason and, thus, to prevent
the scandal which metaphysical controversies are sure, sooner or later,
to cause even to the masses. It is only by criticism that
metaphysicians (and, as such, theologians too) can be saved from these
controversies and from the consequent perversion of their doctrines.
Criticism alone can strike a blow at the root of materialism, fatalism,
atheism, free-thinking, fanaticism, and superstition, which are
universally injurious—as well as of idealism and scepticism, which are
dangerous to the schools, but can scarcely pass over to the public. If
governments think proper to interfere with the affairs of the learned,
it would be more consistent with a wise regard for the interests of
science, as well as for those of society, to favour a criticism of this
kind, by which alone the labours of reason can be established on a firm
basis, than to support the ridiculous despotism of the schools, which
raise a loud cry of danger to the public over the destruction of
cobwebs, of which the public has never taken any notice, and the loss
of which, therefore, it can never feel.

This critical science is not opposed to the _dogmatic procedure_ of
reason in pure cognition; for pure cognition must always be dogmatic,
that is, must rest on strict demonstration from sure principles _à
priori_—but to _dogmatism_, that is, to the presumption that it is
possible to make any progress with a pure cognition, derived from
(philosophical) conceptions, according to the principles which reason
has long been in the habit of employing—without first inquiring in what
way and by what right reason has come into the possession of these
principles. Dogmatism is thus the dogmatic procedure of pure reason
_without previous criticism of its own powers_, and in opposing this
procedure, we must not be supposed to lend any countenance to that
loquacious shallowness which arrogates to itself the name of
popularity, nor yet to scepticism, which makes short work with the
whole science of metaphysics. On the contrary, our criticism is the
necessary preparation for a thoroughly scientific system of metaphysics
which must perform its task entirely _à priori_, to the complete
satisfaction of speculative reason, and must, therefore, be treated,
not popularly, but scholastically. In carrying out the plan which the
Critique prescribes, that is, in the future system of metaphysics, we
must have recourse to the strict method of the celebrated WOLF, the
greatest of all dogmatic philosophers. He was the first to point out
the necessity of establishing fixed principles, of clearly defining our
conceptions, and of subjecting our demonstrations to the most severe
scrutiny, instead of rashly jumping at conclusions. The example which
he set served to awaken that spirit of profound and thorough
investigation which is not yet extinct in Germany. He would have been
peculiarly well fitted to give a truly scientific character to
metaphysical studies, had it occurred to him to prepare the field by a
criticism of the _organum_, that is, of pure reason itself. That he
failed to perceive the necessity of such a procedure must be ascribed
to the dogmatic mode of thought which characterized his age, and on
this point the philosophers of his time, as well as of all previous
times, have nothing to reproach each other with. Those who reject at
once the method of Wolf, and of the Critique of Pure Reason, can have
no other aim but to shake off the fetters of _science_, to change
labour into sport, certainty into opinion, and philosophy into
philodoxy.

In this _second edition_, I have endeavoured, as far as possible, to
remove the difficulties and obscurity which, without fault of mine
perhaps, have given rise to many misconceptions even among acute
thinkers. In the propositions themselves, and in the demonstrations by
which they are supported, as well as in the form and the entire plan of
the work, I have found nothing to alter; which must be attributed
partly to the long examination to which I had subjected the whole
before offering it to the public and partly to the nature of the case.
For pure speculative reason is an organic structure in which there is
nothing isolated or independent, but every Single part is essential to
all the rest; and hence, the slightest imperfection, whether defect or
positive error, could not fail to betray itself in use. I venture,
further, to hope, that this system will maintain the same unalterable
character for the future. I am led to entertain this confidence, not by
vanity, but by the evidence which the equality of the result affords,
when we proceed, first, from the simplest elements up to the complete
whole of pure reason and, and then, backwards from the whole to each
part. We find that the attempt to make the slightest alteration, in any
part, leads inevitably to contradictions, not merely in this system,
but in human reason itself. At the same time, there is still much room
for improvement in the _exposition_ of the doctrines contained in this
work. In the present edition, I have endeavoured to remove
misapprehensions of the æsthetical part, especially with regard to the
conception of time; to clear away the obscurity which has been found in
the deduction of the conceptions of the understanding; to supply the
supposed want of sufficient evidence in the demonstration of the
principles of the pure understanding; and, lastly, to obviate the
misunderstanding of the paralogisms which immediately precede the
Rational Psychology. Beyond this point—the end of the second main
division of the “Transcendental Dialectic”—I have not extended my
alterations,[8] partly from want of time, and partly because I am not
aware that any portion of the remainder has given rise to
misconceptions among intelligent and impartial critics, whom I do not
here mention with that praise which is their due, but who will find
that their suggestions have been attended to in the work itself.

 [8] The only addition, properly so called—and that only in the method
 of proof—which I have made in the present edition, consists of a new
 refutation of psychological _Idealism_, and a strict demonstration—the
 only one possible, as I believe—of the objective reality of external
 intuition. However harmless idealism may be considered—although in
 reality it is not so—in regard to the essential ends of metaphysics,
 it must still remain a scandal to philosophy and to the general human
 reason to be obliged to assume, as an article of mere belief, the
 existence of things external to ourselves (from which, yet, we derive
 the whole material of cognition for the internal sense), and not to be
 able to oppose a satisfactory proof to any one who may call it in
 question. As there is some obscurity of expression in the
 demonstration as it stands in the text, I propose to alter the passage
 in question as follows: “But this permanent cannot be an intuition in
 me. For all the determining grounds of my existence which can be found
 in me are representations and, as such, do themselves require a
 permanent, distinct from them, which may determine my existence in
 relation to their changes, that is, my existence in time, wherein they
 change.” It may, probably, be urged in opposition to this proof that,
 after all, I am only conscious immediately of that which is in me,
 that is, of my _representation_ of external things, and that,
 consequently, it must always remain uncertain whether anything
 corresponding to this representation does or does not exist externally
 to me. But I am conscious, through internal _experience_, of my
 _existence in time_ (consequently, also, of the determinability of the
 former in the latter), and that is more than the simple consciousness
 of my representation. It is, in fact, the same as the _empirical
 consciousness of my existence_, which can only be determined in
 relation to something, which, while connected with my existence, is
 _external to me_. This consciousness of my existence in time is,
 therefore, identical with the consciousness of a relation to something
 external to me, and it is, therefore, experience, not fiction, sense,
 not imagination, which inseparably connects the external with my
 internal sense. For the external sense is, in itself, the relation of
 intuition to something real, external to me; and the reality of this
 something, as opposed to the mere imagination of it, rests solely on
 its inseparable connection with internal experience as the condition
 of its possibility. If with the _intellectual consciousness_ of my
 existence, in the representation: _I am_, which accompanies all my
 judgements, and all the operations of my understanding, I could, at
 the same time, connect a determination of my existence by
 _intellectual intuition_, then the consciousness of a relation to
 something external to me would not be necessary. But the internal
 intuition in which alone my existence can be determined, though
 preceded by that purely intellectual consciousness, is itself sensible
 and attached to the condition of time. Hence this determination of my
 existence, and consequently my internal experience itself, must depend
 on something permanent which is not in me, which can be, therefore,
 only in something external to me, to which I must look upon myself as
 being related. Thus the reality of the external sense is necessarily
 connected with that of the internal, in order to the possibility of
 experience in general; that is, I am just as certainly conscious that
 there are things external to me related to my sense as I am that I
 myself exist as determined in time. But in order to ascertain to what
 given intuitions objects, external me, really correspond, in other
 words, what intuitions belong to the external sense and not to
 imagination, I must have recourse, in every particular case, to those
 rules according to which experience in general (even internal
 experience) is distinguished from imagination, and which are always
 based on the proposition that there really is an external
 experience.—We may add the remark that the representation of something
 _permanent_ in existence, is not the same thing as the _permanent
 representation;_ for a representation may be very variable and
 changing—as all our representations, even that of matter, are—and yet
 refer to something permanent, which must, therefore, be distinct from
 all my representations and external to me, the existence of which is
 necessarily included in the determination of my own existence, and
 with it constitutes _one_ experience—an experience which would not
 even be possible internally, if it were not also at the same time, in
 part, external. To the question _How?_ we are no more able to reply,
 than we are, in general, to think the stationary in time, the
 coexistence of which with the variable, produces the conception of
 change.

In attempting to render the exposition of my views as intelligible as
possible, I have been compelled to leave out or abridge various
passages which were not essential to the completeness of the work, but
which many readers might consider useful in other respects, and might
be unwilling to miss. This trifling loss, which could not be avoided
without swelling the book beyond due limits, may be supplied, at the
pleasure of the reader, by a comparison with the first edition, and
will, I hope, be more than compensated for by the greater clearness of
the exposition as it now stands.

I have observed, with pleasure and thankfulness, in the pages of
various reviews and treatises, that the spirit of profound and thorough
investigation is not extinct in Germany, though it may have been
overborne and silenced for a time by the fashionable tone of a licence
in thinking, which gives itself the airs of genius, and that the
difficulties which beset the paths of criticism have not prevented
energetic and acute thinkers from making themselves masters of the
science of pure reason to which these paths conduct—a science which is
not popular, but scholastic in its character, and which alone can hope
for a lasting existence or possess an abiding value. To these deserving
men, who so happily combine profundity of view with a talent for lucid
exposition—a talent which I myself am not conscious of possessing—I
leave the task of removing any obscurity which may still adhere to the
statement of my doctrines. For, in this case, the danger is not that of
being refuted, but of being misunderstood. For my own part, I must
henceforward abstain from controversy, although I shall carefully
attend to all suggestions, whether from friends or adversaries, which
may be of use in the future elaboration of the system of this
Propædeutic. As, during these labours, I have advanced pretty far in
years this month I reach my sixty-fourth year—it will be necessary for
me to economize time, if I am to carry out my plan of elaborating the
metaphysics of nature as well as of morals, in confirmation of the
correctness of the principles established in this Critique of Pure
Reason, both speculative and practical; and I must, therefore, leave
the task of clearing up the obscurities of the present work—inevitable,
perhaps, at the outset—as well as, the defence of the whole, to those
deserving men, who have made my system their own. A philosophical
system cannot come forward armed at all points like a mathematical
treatise, and hence it may be quite possible to take objection to
particular passages, while the organic structure of the system,
considered as a unity, has no danger to apprehend. But few possess the
ability, and still fewer the inclination, to take a comprehensive view
of a new system. By confining the view to particular passages, taking
these out of their connection and comparing them with one another, it
is easy to pick out apparent contradictions, especially in a work
written with any freedom of style. These contradictions place the work
in an unfavourable light in the eyes of those who rely on the judgement
of others, but are easily reconciled by those who have mastered the
idea of the whole. If a theory possesses stability in itself, the
action and reaction which seemed at first to threaten its existence
serve only, in the course of time, to smooth down any superficial
roughness or inequality, and—if men of insight, impartiality, and truly
popular gifts, turn their attention to it—to secure to it, in a short
time, the requisite elegance also.

KÖNIGSBERG, _April_ 1787.

Introduction

I. Of the difference between Pure and Empirical Knowledge

That all our knowledge begins with experience there can be no doubt.
For how is it possible that the faculty of cognition should be awakened
into exercise otherwise than by means of objects which affect our
senses, and partly of themselves produce representations, partly rouse
our powers of understanding into activity, to compare to connect, or to
separate these, and so to convert the raw material of our sensuous
impressions into a knowledge of objects, which is called experience? In
respect of time, therefore, no knowledge of ours is antecedent to
experience, but begins with it.

But, though all our knowledge begins with experience, it by no means
follows that all arises out of experience. For, on the contrary, it is
quite possible that our empirical knowledge is a compound of that which
we receive through impressions, and that which the faculty of cognition
supplies from itself (sensuous impressions giving merely the occasion),
an addition which we cannot distinguish from the original element given
by sense, till long practice has made us attentive to, and skilful in
separating it. It is, therefore, a question which requires close
investigation, and not to be answered at first sight, whether there
exists a knowledge altogether independent of experience, and even of
all sensuous impressions? Knowledge of this kind is called à priori, in
contradistinction to empirical knowledge, which has its sources à
posteriori, that is, in experience.

But the expression, “à priori,” is not as yet definite enough
adequately to indicate the whole meaning of the question above started.
For, in speaking of knowledge which has its sources in experience, we
are wont to say, that this or that may be known à priori, because we do
not derive this knowledge immediately from experience, but from a
general rule, which, however, we have itself borrowed from experience.
Thus, if a man undermined his house, we say, “he might know à priori
that it would have fallen;” that is, he needed not to have waited for
the experience that it did actually fall. But still, à priori, he could
not know even this much. For, that bodies are heavy, and, consequently,
that they fall when their supports are taken away, must have been known
to him previously, by means of experience.

By the term “knowledge à priori,” therefore, we shall in the sequel
understand, not such as is independent of this or that kind of
experience, but such as is absolutely so of all experience. Opposed to
this is empirical knowledge, or that which is possible only à
posteriori, that is, through experience. Knowledge à priori is either
pure or impure. Pure knowledge à priori is that with which no empirical
element is mixed up. For example, the proposition, “Every change has a
cause,” is a proposition à priori, but impure, because change is a
conception which can only be derived from experience.

II. The Human Intellect, even in an Unphilosophical State, is in
Possession of Certain Cognitions “à priori”.

The question now is as to a criterion, by which we may securely
distinguish a pure from an empirical cognition. Experience no doubt
teaches us that this or that object is constituted in such and such a
manner, but not that it could not possibly exist otherwise. Now, in the
first place, if we have a proposition which contains the idea of
necessity in its very conception, it is priori. If, moreover, it is not
derived from any other proposition, unless from one equally involving
the idea of necessity, it is absolutely priori. Secondly, an empirical
judgement never exhibits strict and absolute, but only assumed and
comparative universality (by induction); therefore, the most we can say
is—so far as we have hitherto observed, there is no exception to this
or that rule. If, on the other hand, a judgement carries with it strict
and absolute universality, that is, admits of no possible exception, it
is not derived from experience, but is valid absolutely à priori.

Empirical universality is, therefore, only an arbitrary extension of
validity, from that which may be predicated of a proposition valid in
most cases, to that which is asserted of a proposition which holds good
in all; as, for example, in the affirmation, “All bodies are heavy.”
When, on the contrary, strict universality characterizes a judgement,
it necessarily indicates another peculiar source of knowledge, namely,
a faculty of cognition à priori. Necessity and strict universality,
therefore, are infallible tests for distinguishing pure from empirical
knowledge, and are inseparably connected with each other. But as in the
use of these criteria the empirical limitation is sometimes more easily
detected than the contingency of the judgement, or the unlimited
universality which we attach to a judgement is often a more convincing
proof than its necessity, it may be advisable to use the criteria
separately, each being by itself infallible.

Now, that in the sphere of human cognition we have judgements which are
necessary, and in the strictest sense universal, consequently pure à
priori, it will be an easy matter to show. If we desire an example from
the sciences, we need only take any proposition in mathematics. If we
cast our eyes upon the commonest operations of the understanding, the
proposition, “Every change must have a cause,” will amply serve our
purpose. In the latter case, indeed, the conception of a cause so
plainly involves the conception of a necessity of connection with an
effect, and of a strict universality of the law, that the very notion
of a cause would entirely disappear, were we to derive it, like Hume,
from a frequent association of what happens with that which precedes;
and the habit thence originating of connecting representations—the
necessity inherent in the judgement being therefore merely subjective.
Besides, without seeking for such examples of principles existing à
priori in cognition, we might easily show that such principles are the
indispensable basis of the possibility of experience itself, and
consequently prove their existence à priori. For whence could our
experience itself acquire certainty, if all the rules on which it
depends were themselves empirical, and consequently fortuitous? No one,
therefore, can admit the validity of the use of such rules as first
principles. But, for the present, we may content ourselves with having
established the fact, that we do possess and exercise a faculty of pure
à priori cognition; and, secondly, with having pointed out the proper
tests of such cognition, namely, universality and necessity.

Not only in judgements, however, but even in conceptions, is an à
priori origin manifest. For example, if we take away by degrees from
our conceptions of a body all that can be referred to mere sensuous
experience—colour, hardness or softness, weight, even
impenetrability—the body will then vanish; but the space which it
occupied still remains, and this it is utterly impossible to annihilate
in thought. Again, if we take away, in like manner, from our empirical
conception of any object, corporeal or incorporeal, all properties
which mere experience has taught us to connect with it, still we cannot
think away those through which we cogitate it as substance, or adhering
to substance, although our conception of substance is more determined
than that of an object. Compelled, therefore, by that necessity with
which the conception of substance forces itself upon us, we must
confess that it has its seat in our faculty of cognition à priori.

III. Philosophy stands in need of a Science which shall Determine the
Possibility, Principles, and Extent of Human Knowledge “à priori”

Of far more importance than all that has been above said, is the
consideration that certain of our cognitions rise completely above the
sphere of all possible experience, and by means of conceptions, to
which there exists in the whole extent of experience no corresponding
object, seem to extend the range of our judgements beyond its bounds.
And just in this transcendental or supersensible sphere, where
experience affords us neither instruction nor guidance, lie the
investigations of reason, which, on account of their importance, we
consider far preferable to, and as having a far more elevated aim than,
all that the understanding can achieve within the sphere of sensuous
phenomena. So high a value do we set upon these investigations, that
even at the risk of error, we persist in following them out, and permit
neither doubt nor disregard nor indifference to restrain us from the
pursuit. These unavoidable problems of mere pure reason are God,
freedom (of will), and immortality. The science which, with all its
preliminaries, has for its especial object the solution of these
problems is named metaphysics—a science which is at the very outset
dogmatical, that is, it confidently takes upon itself the execution of
this task without any previous investigation of the ability or
inability of reason for such an undertaking.

Now the safe ground of experience being thus abandoned, it seems
nevertheless natural that we should hesitate to erect a building with
the cognitions we possess, without knowing whence they come, and on the
strength of principles, the origin of which is undiscovered. Instead of
thus trying to build without a foundation, it is rather to be expected
that we should long ago have put the question, how the understanding
can arrive at these à priori cognitions, and what is the extent,
validity, and worth which they may possess? We say, “This is natural
enough,” meaning by the word natural, that which is consistent with a
just and reasonable way of thinking; but if we understand by the term,
that which usually happens, nothing indeed could be more natural and
more comprehensible than that this investigation should be left long
unattempted. For one part of our pure knowledge, the science of
mathematics, has been long firmly established, and thus leads us to
form flattering expectations with regard to others, though these may be
of quite a different nature. Besides, when we get beyond the bounds of
experience, we are of course safe from opposition in that quarter; and
the charm of widening the range of our knowledge is so great that,
unless we are brought to a standstill by some evident contradiction, we
hurry on undoubtingly in our course. This, however, may be avoided, if
we are sufficiently cautious in the construction of our fictions, which
are not the less fictions on that account.

Mathematical science affords us a brilliant example, how far,
independently of all experience, we may carry our à priori knowledge.
It is true that the mathematician occupies himself with objects and
cognitions only in so far as they can be represented by means of
intuition. But this circumstance is easily overlooked, because the said
intuition can itself be given à priori, and therefore is hardly to be
distinguished from a mere pure conception. Deceived by such a proof of
the power of reason, we can perceive no limits to the extension of our
knowledge. The light dove cleaving in free flight the thin air, whose
resistance it feels, might imagine that her movements would be far more
free and rapid in airless space. Just in the same way did Plato,
abandoning the world of sense because of the narrow limits it sets to
the understanding, venture upon the wings of ideas beyond it, into the
void space of pure intellect. He did not reflect that he made no real
progress by all his efforts; for he met with no resistance which might
serve him for a support, as it were, whereon to rest, and on which he
might apply his powers, in order to let the intellect acquire momentum
for its progress. It is, indeed, the common fate of human reason in
speculation, to finish the imposing edifice of thought as rapidly as
possible, and then for the first time to begin to examine whether the
foundation is a solid one or no. Arrived at this point, all sorts of
excuses are sought after, in order to console us for its want of
stability, or rather, indeed, to enable Us to dispense altogether with
so late and dangerous an investigation. But what frees us during the
process of building from all apprehension or suspicion, and flatters us
into the belief of its solidity, is this. A great part, perhaps the
greatest part, of the business of our reason consists in the
analysation of the conceptions which we already possess of objects. By
this means we gain a multitude of cognitions, which although really
nothing more than elucidations or explanations of that which (though in
a confused manner) was already thought in our conceptions, are, at
least in respect of their form, prized as new introspections; whilst,
so far as regards their matter or content, we have really made no
addition to our conceptions, but only disinvolved them. But as this
process does furnish a real priori knowledge, which has a sure progress
and useful results, reason, deceived by this, slips in, without being
itself aware of it, assertions of a quite different kind; in which, to
given conceptions it adds others, à priori indeed, but entirely foreign
to them, without our knowing how it arrives at these, and, indeed,
without such a question ever suggesting itself. I shall therefore at
once proceed to examine the difference between these two modes of
knowledge.

IV. Of the Difference Between Analytical and Synthetical Judgements.

In all judgements wherein the relation of a subject to the predicate is
cogitated (I mention affirmative judgements only here; the application
to negative will be very easy), this relation is possible in two
different ways. Either the predicate B belongs to the subject A, as
somewhat which is contained (though covertly) in the conception A; or
the predicate B lies completely out of the conception A, although it
stands in connection with it. In the first instance, I term the
judgement analytical, in the second, synthetical. Analytical judgements
(affirmative) are therefore those in which the connection of the
predicate with the subject is cogitated through identity; those in
which this connection is cogitated without identity, are called
synthetical judgements. The former may be called explicative, the
latter augmentative judgements; because the former add in the predicate
nothing to the conception of the subject, but only analyse it into its
constituent conceptions, which were thought already in the subject,
although in a confused manner; the latter add to our conceptions of the
subject a predicate which was not contained in it, and which no
analysis could ever have discovered therein. For example, when I say,
“All bodies are extended,” this is an analytical judgement. For I need
not go beyond the conception of body in order to find extension
connected with it, but merely analyse the conception, that is, become
conscious of the manifold properties which I think in that conception,
in order to discover this predicate in it: it is therefore an
analytical judgement. On the other hand, when I say, “All bodies are
heavy,” the predicate is something totally different from that which I
think in the mere conception of a body. By the addition of such a
predicate, therefore, it becomes a synthetical judgement.

Judgements of experience, as such, are always synthetical. For it would
be absurd to think of grounding an analytical judgement on experience,
because in forming such a judgement I need not go out of the sphere of
my conceptions, and therefore recourse to the testimony of experience
is quite unnecessary. That “bodies are extended” is not an empirical
judgement, but a proposition which stands firm à priori. For before
addressing myself to experience, I already have in my conception all
the requisite conditions for the judgement, and I have only to extract
the predicate from the conception, according to the principle of
contradiction, and thereby at the same time become conscious of the
necessity of the judgement, a necessity which I could never learn from
experience. On the other hand, though at first I do not at all include
the predicate of weight in my conception of body in general, that
conception still indicates an object of experience, a part of the
totality of experience, to which I can still add other parts; and this
I do when I recognize by observation that bodies are heavy. I can
cognize beforehand by analysis the conception of body through the
characteristics of extension, impenetrability, shape, etc., all which
are cogitated in this conception. But now I extend my knowledge, and
looking back on experience from which I had derived this conception of
body, I find weight at all times connected with the above
characteristics, and therefore I synthetically add to my conceptions
this as a predicate, and say, “All bodies are heavy.” Thus it is
experience upon which rests the possibility of the synthesis of the
predicate of weight with the conception of body, because both
conceptions, although the one is not contained in the other, still
belong to one another (only contingently, however), as parts of a
whole, namely, of experience, which is itself a synthesis of
intuitions.

But to synthetical judgements à priori, such aid is entirely wanting.
If I go out of and beyond the conception A, in order to recognize
another B as connected with it, what foundation have I to rest on,
whereby to render the synthesis possible? I have here no longer the
advantage of looking out in the sphere of experience for what I want.
Let us take, for example, the proposition, “Everything that happens has
a cause.” In the conception of “something that happens,” I indeed think
an existence which a certain time antecedes, and from this I can derive
analytical judgements. But the conception of a cause lies quite out of
the above conception, and indicates something entirely different from
“that which happens,” and is consequently not contained in that
conception. How then am I able to assert concerning the general
conception—“that which happens”—something entirely different from that
conception, and to recognize the conception of cause although not
contained in it, yet as belonging to it, and even necessarily? what is
here the unknown = X, upon which the understanding rests when it
believes it has found, out of the conception A a foreign predicate B,
which it nevertheless considers to be connected with it? It cannot be
experience, because the principle adduced annexes the two
representations, cause and effect, to the representation existence, not
only with universality, which experience cannot give, but also with the
expression of necessity, therefore completely à priori and from pure
conceptions. Upon such synthetical, that is augmentative propositions,
depends the whole aim of our speculative knowledge à priori; for
although analytical judgements are indeed highly important and
necessary, they are so, only to arrive at that clearness of conceptions
which is requisite for a sure and extended synthesis, and this alone is
a real acquisition.

V. In all Theoretical Sciences of Reason, Synthetical Judgements “à
priori” are contained as Principles.

1. Mathematical judgements are always synthetical. Hitherto this fact,
though incontestably true and very important in its consequences, seems
to have escaped the analysts of the human mind, nay, to be in complete
opposition to all their conjectures. For as it was found that
mathematical conclusions all proceed according to the principle of
contradiction (which the nature of every apodeictic certainty
requires), people became persuaded that the fundamental principles of
the science also were recognized and admitted in the same way. But the
notion is fallacious; for although a synthetical proposition can
certainly be discerned by means of the principle of contradiction, this
is possible only when another synthetical proposition precedes, from
which the latter is deduced, but never of itself.

Before all, be it observed, that proper mathematical propositions are
always judgements à priori, and not empirical, because they carry along
with them the conception of necessity, which cannot be given by
experience. If this be demurred to, it matters not; I will then limit
my assertion to pure mathematics, the very conception of which implies
that it consists of knowledge altogether non-empirical and à priori.

We might, indeed at first suppose that the proposition 7 + 5 = 12 is a
merely analytical proposition, following (according to the principle of
contradiction) from the conception of a sum of seven and five. But if
we regard it more narrowly, we find that our conception of the sum of
seven and five contains nothing more than the uniting of both sums into
one, whereby it cannot at all be cogitated what this single number is
which embraces both. The conception of twelve is by no means obtained
by merely cogitating the union of seven and five; and we may analyse
our conception of such a possible sum as long as we will, still we
shall never discover in it the notion of twelve. We must go beyond
these conceptions, and have recourse to an intuition which corresponds
to one of the two—our five fingers, for example, or like Segner in his
Arithmetic five points, and so by degrees, add the units contained in
the five given in the intuition, to the conception of seven. For I
first take the number 7, and, for the conception of 5 calling in the
aid of the fingers of my hand as objects of intuition, I add the units,
which I before took together to make up the number 5, gradually now by
means of the material image my hand, to the number 7, and by this
process, I at length see the number 12 arise. That 7 should be added to
5, I have certainly cogitated in my conception of a sum = 7 + 5, but
not that this sum was equal to 12. Arithmetical propositions are
therefore always synthetical, of which we may become more clearly
convinced by trying large numbers. For it will thus become quite
evident that, turn and twist our conceptions as we may, it is
impossible, without having recourse to intuition, to arrive at the sum
total or product by means of the mere analysis of our conceptions. Just
as little is any principle of pure geometry analytical. “A straight
line between two points is the shortest,” is a synthetical proposition.
For my conception of straight contains no notion of quantity, but is
merely qualitative. The conception of the shortest is therefore fore
wholly an addition, and by no analysis can it be extracted from our
conception of a straight line. Intuition must therefore here lend its
aid, by means of which, and thus only, our synthesis is possible.

Some few principles preposited by geometricians are, indeed, really
analytical, and depend on the principle of contradiction. They serve,
however, like identical propositions, as links in the chain of method,
not as principles—for example, a = a, the whole is equal to itself, or
(a+b) —> a, the whole is greater than its part. And yet even these
principles themselves, though they derive their validity from pure
conceptions, are only admitted in mathematics because they can be
presented in intuition. What causes us here commonly to believe that
the predicate of such apodeictic judgements is already contained in our
conception, and that the judgement is therefore analytical, is merely
the equivocal nature of the expression. We must join in thought a
certain predicate to a given conception, and this necessity cleaves
already to the conception. But the question is, not what we must join
in thought to the given conception, but what we really think therein,
though only obscurely, and then it becomes manifest that the predicate
pertains to these conceptions, necessarily indeed, yet not as thought
in the conception itself, but by virtue of an intuition, which must be
added to the conception.

2. The science of natural philosophy (physics) contains in itself
synthetical judgements à priori, as principles. I shall adduce two
propositions. For instance, the proposition, “In all changes of the
material world, the quantity of matter remains unchanged”; or, that,
“In all communication of motion, action and reaction must always be
equal.” In both of these, not only is the necessity, and therefore
their origin à priori clear, but also that they are synthetical
propositions. For in the conception of matter, I do not cogitate its
permanency, but merely its presence in space, which it fills. I
therefore really go out of and beyond the conception of matter, in
order to think on to it something à priori, which I did not think in
it. The proposition is therefore not analytical, but synthetical, and
nevertheless conceived à priori; and so it is with regard to the other
propositions of the pure part of natural philosophy.

3. As to metaphysics, even if we look upon it merely as an attempted
science, yet, from the nature of human reason, an indispensable one, we
find that it must contain synthetical propositions à priori. It is not
merely the duty of metaphysics to dissect, and thereby analytically to
illustrate the conceptions which we form à priori of things; but we
seek to widen the range of our à priori knowledge. For this purpose, we
must avail ourselves of such principles as add something to the
original conception—something not identical with, nor contained in it,
and by means of synthetical judgements à priori, leave far behind us
the limits of experience; for example, in the proposition, “the world
must have a beginning,” and such like. Thus metaphysics, according to
the proper aim of the science, consists merely of synthetical
propositions à priori.

VI. The Universal Problem of Pure Reason.

It is extremely advantageous to be able to bring a number of
investigations under the formula of a single problem. For in this
manner, we not only facilitate our own labour, inasmuch as we define it
clearly to ourselves, but also render it more easy for others to decide
whether we have done justice to our undertaking. The proper problem of
pure reason, then, is contained in the question: “How are synthetical
judgements à priori possible?”

That metaphysical science has hitherto remained in so vacillating a
state of uncertainty and contradiction, is only to be attributed to the
fact that this great problem, and perhaps even the difference between
analytical and synthetical judgements, did not sooner suggest itself to
philosophers. Upon the solution of this problem, or upon sufficient
proof of the impossibility of synthetical knowledge à priori, depends
the existence or downfall of the science of metaphysics. Among
philosophers, David Hume came the nearest of all to this problem; yet
it never acquired in his mind sufficient precision, nor did he regard
the question in its universality. On the contrary, he stopped short at
the synthetical proposition of the connection of an effect with its
cause (principium causalitatis), insisting that such proposition à
priori was impossible. According to his conclusions, then, all that we
term metaphysical science is a mere delusion, arising from the fancied
insight of reason into that which is in truth borrowed from experience,
and to which habit has given the appearance of necessity. Against this
assertion, destructive to all pure philosophy, he would have been
guarded, had he had our problem before his eyes in its universality.
For he would then have perceived that, according to his own argument,
there likewise could not be any pure mathematical science, which
assuredly cannot exist without synthetical propositions à priori—an
absurdity from which his good understanding must have saved him.

In the solution of the above problem is at the same time comprehended
the possibility of the use of pure reason in the foundation and
construction of all sciences which contain theoretical knowledge à
priori of objects, that is to say, the answer to the following
questions:

How is pure mathematical science possible?

How is pure natural science possible?

Respecting these sciences, as they do certainly exist, it may with
propriety be asked, how they are possible?—for that they must be
possible is shown by the fact of their really existing.[9] But as to
metaphysics, the miserable progress it has hitherto made, and the fact
that of no one system yet brought forward, far as regards its true aim,
can it be said that this science really exists, leaves any one at
liberty to doubt with reason the very possibility of its existence.

 [9] As to the existence of pure natural science, or physics, perhaps
 many may still express doubts. But we have only to look at the
 different propositions which are commonly treated of at the
 commencement of proper (empirical) physical science—those, for
 example, relating to the permanence of the same quantity of matter,
 the vis inertiae, the equality of action and reaction, etc.—to be soon
 convinced that they form a science of pure physics (physica pura, or
 rationalis), which well deserves to be separately exposed as a special
 science, in its whole extent, whether that be great or confined.

Yet, in a certain sense, this kind of knowledge must unquestionably be
looked upon as given; in other words, metaphysics must be considered as
really existing, if not as a science, nevertheless as a natural
disposition of the human mind (metaphysica naturalis). For human
reason, without any instigations imputable to the mere vanity of great
knowledge, unceasingly progresses, urged on by its own feeling of need,
towards such questions as cannot be answered by any empirical
application of reason, or principles derived therefrom; and so there
has ever really existed in every man some system of metaphysics. It
will always exist, so soon as reason awakes to the exercise of its
power of speculation. And now the question arises: “How is metaphysics,
as a natural disposition, possible?” In other words, how, from the
nature of universal human reason, do those questions arise which pure
reason proposes to itself, and which it is impelled by its own feeling
of need to answer as well as it can?

But as in all the attempts hitherto made to answer the questions which
reason is prompted by its very nature to propose to itself, for
example, whether the world had a beginning, or has existed from
eternity, it has always met with unavoidable contradictions, we must
not rest satisfied with the mere natural disposition of the mind to
metaphysics, that is, with the existence of the faculty of pure reason,
whence, indeed, some sort of metaphysical system always arises; but it
must be possible to arrive at certainty in regard to the question
whether we know or do not know the things of which metaphysics treats.
We must be able to arrive at a decision on the subjects of its
questions, or on the ability or inability of reason to form any
judgement respecting them; and therefore either to extend with
confidence the bounds of our pure reason, or to set strictly defined
and safe limits to its action. This last question, which arises out of
the above universal problem, would properly run thus: “How is
metaphysics possible as a science?”

Thus, the critique of reason leads at last, naturally and necessarily,
to science; and, on the other hand, the dogmatical use of reason
without criticism leads to groundless assertions, against which others
equally specious can always be set, thus ending unavoidably in
scepticism.

Besides, this science cannot be of great and formidable prolixity,
because it has not to do with objects of reason, the variety of which
is inexhaustible, but merely with Reason herself and her problems;
problems which arise out of her own bosom, and are not proposed to her
by the nature of outward things, but by her own nature. And when once
Reason has previously become able completely to understand her own
power in regard to objects which she meets with in experience, it will
be easy to determine securely the extent and limits of her attempted
application to objects beyond the confines of experience.

We may and must, therefore, regard the attempts hitherto made to
establish metaphysical science dogmatically as non-existent. For what
of analysis, that is, mere dissection of conceptions, is contained in
one or other, is not the aim of, but only a preparation for metaphysics
proper, which has for its object the extension, by means of synthesis,
of our à priori knowledge. And for this purpose, mere analysis is of
course useless, because it only shows what is contained in these
conceptions, but not how we arrive, à priori, at them; and this it is
her duty to show, in order to be able afterwards to determine their
valid use in regard to all objects of experience, to all knowledge in
general. But little self-denial, indeed, is needed to give up these
pretensions, seeing the undeniable, and in the dogmatic mode of
procedure, inevitable contradictions of Reason with herself, have long
since ruined the reputation of every system of metaphysics that has
appeared up to this time. It will require more firmness to remain
undeterred by difficulty from within, and opposition from without, from
endeavouring, by a method quite opposed to all those hitherto followed,
to further the growth and fruitfulness of a science indispensable to
human reason—a science from which every branch it has borne may be cut
away, but whose roots remain indestructible.

VII. Idea and Division of a Particular Science, under the Name of a
Critique of Pure Reason.

From all that has been said, there results the idea of a particular
science, which may be called the Critique of Pure Reason. For reason is
the faculty which furnishes us with the principles of knowledge à
priori. Hence, pure reason is the faculty which contains the principles
of cognizing anything absolutely à priori. An organon of pure reason
would be a compendium of those principles according to which alone all
pure cognitions à priori can be obtained. The completely extended
application of such an organon would afford us a system of pure reason.
As this, however, is demanding a great deal, and it is yet doubtful
whether any extension of our knowledge be here possible, or, if so, in
what cases; we can regard a science of the mere criticism of pure
reason, its sources and limits, as the propædeutic to a system of pure
reason. Such a science must not be called a doctrine, but only a
critique of pure reason; and its use, in regard to speculation, would
be only negative, not to enlarge the bounds of, but to purify, our
reason, and to shield it against error—which alone is no little gain. I
apply the term transcendental to all knowledge which is not so much
occupied with objects as with the mode of our cognition of these
objects, so far as this mode of cognition is possible à priori. A
system of such conceptions would be called transcendental philosophy.
But this, again, is still beyond the bounds of our present essay. For
as such a science must contain a complete exposition not only of our
synthetical à priori, but of our analytical à priori knowledge, it is
of too wide a range for our present purpose, because we do not require
to carry our analysis any farther than is necessary to understand, in
their full extent, the principles of synthesis à priori, with which
alone we have to do. This investigation, which we cannot properly call
a doctrine, but only a transcendental critique, because it aims not at
the enlargement, but at the correction and guidance, of our knowledge,
and is to serve as a touchstone of the worth or worthlessness of all
knowledge à priori, is the sole object of our present essay. Such a
critique is consequently, as far as possible, a preparation for an
organon; and if this new organon should be found to fail, at least for
a canon of pure reason, according to which the complete system of the
philosophy of pure reason, whether it extend or limit the bounds of
that reason, might one day be set forth both analytically and
synthetically. For that this is possible, nay, that such a system is
not of so great extent as to preclude the hope of its ever being
completed, is evident. For we have not here to do with the nature of
outward objects, which is infinite, but solely with the mind, which
judges of the nature of objects, and, again, with the mind only in
respect of its cognition à priori. And the object of our
investigations, as it is not to be sought without, but, altogether
within, ourselves, cannot remain concealed, and in all probability is
limited enough to be completely surveyed and fairly estimated,
according to its worth or worthlessness. Still less let the reader here
expect a critique of books and systems of pure reason; our present
object is exclusively a critique of the faculty of pure reason itself.
Only when we make this critique our foundation, do we possess a pure
touchstone for estimating the philosophical value of ancient and modern
writings on this subject; and without this criterion, the incompetent
historian or judge decides upon and corrects the groundless assertions
of others with his own, which have themselves just as little
foundation.

Transcendental philosophy is the idea of a science, for which the
Critique of Pure Reason must sketch the whole plan architectonically,
that is, from principles, with a full guarantee for the validity and
stability of all the parts which enter into the building. It is the
system of all the principles of pure reason. If this Critique itself
does not assume the title of transcendental philosophy, it is only
because, to be a complete system, it ought to contain a full analysis
of all human knowledge à priori. Our critique must, indeed, lay before
us a complete enumeration of all the radical conceptions which
constitute the said pure knowledge. But from the complete analysis of
these conceptions themselves, as also from a complete investigation of
those derived from them, it abstains with reason; partly because it
would be deviating from the end in view to occupy itself with this
analysis, since this process is not attended with the difficulty and
insecurity to be found in the synthesis, to which our critique is
entirely devoted, and partly because it would be inconsistent with the
unity of our plan to burden this essay with the vindication of the
completeness of such an analysis and deduction, with which, after all,
we have at present nothing to do. This completeness of the analysis of
these radical conceptions, as well as of the deduction from the
conceptions à priori which may be given by the analysis, we can,
however, easily attain, provided only that we are in possession of all
these radical conceptions, which are to serve as principles of the
synthesis, and that in respect of this main purpose nothing is wanting.

To the Critique of Pure Reason, therefore, belongs all that constitutes
transcendental philosophy; and it is the complete idea of
transcendental philosophy, but still not the science itself; because it
only proceeds so far with the analysis as is necessary to the power of
judging completely of our synthetical knowledge à priori.

The principal thing we must attend to, in the division of the parts of
a science like this, is that no conceptions must enter it which contain
aught empirical; in other words, that the knowledge à priori must be
completely pure. Hence, although the highest principles and fundamental
conceptions of morality are certainly cognitions à priori, yet they do
not belong to transcendental philosophy; because, though they certainly
do not lay the conceptions of pain, pleasure, desires, inclinations,
etc. (which are all of empirical origin), at the foundation of its
precepts, yet still into the conception of duty—as an obstacle to be
overcome, or as an incitement which should not be made into a
motive—these empirical conceptions must necessarily enter, in the
construction of a system of pure morality. Transcendental philosophy is
consequently a philosophy of the pure and merely speculative reason.
For all that is practical, so far as it contains motives, relates to
feelings, and these belong to empirical sources of cognition.

If we wish to divide this science from the universal point of view of a
science in general, it ought to comprehend, first, a Doctrine of the
Elements, and, secondly, a Doctrine of the Method of pure reason. Each
of these main divisions will have its subdivisions, the separate
reasons for which we cannot here particularize. Only so much seems
necessary, by way of introduction of premonition, that there are two
sources of human knowledge (which probably spring from a common, but to
us unknown root), namely, sense and understanding. By the former,
objects are given to us; by the latter, thought. So far as the faculty
of sense may contain representations à priori, which form the
conditions under which objects are given, in so far it belongs to
transcendental philosophy. The transcendental doctrine of sense must
form the first part of our science of elements, because the conditions
under which alone the objects of human knowledge are given must precede
those under which they are thought.

I. TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF ELEMENTS.

FIRST PART. TRANSCENDENTAL ÆSTHETIC.

§ I. Introductory.

In whatsoever mode, or by whatsoever means, our knowledge may relate to
objects, it is at least quite clear that the only manner in which it
immediately relates to them is by means of an intuition. To this as the
indispensable groundwork, all thought points. But an intuition can take
place only in so far as the object is given to us. This, again, is only
possible, to man at least, on condition that the object affect the mind
in a certain manner. The capacity for receiving representations
(receptivity) through the mode in which we are affected by objects,
objects, is called sensibility. By means of sensibility, therefore,
objects are given to us, and it alone furnishes us with intuitions; by
the understanding they are thought, and from it arise conceptions. But
an thought must directly, or indirectly, by means of certain signs,
relate ultimately to intuitions; consequently, with us, to sensibility,
because in no other way can an object be given to us.

The effect of an object upon the faculty of representation, so far as
we are affected by the said object, is sensation. That sort of
intuition which relates to an object by means of sensation is called an
empirical intuition. The undetermined object of an empirical intuition
is called phenomenon. That which in the phenomenon corresponds to the
sensation, I term its matter; but that which effects that the content
of the phenomenon can be arranged under certain relations, I call its
form. But that in which our sensations are merely arranged, and by
which they are susceptible of assuming a certain form, cannot be itself
sensation. It is, then, the matter of all phenomena that is given to us
à posteriori; the form must lie ready à priori for them in the mind,
and consequently can be regarded separately from all sensation.

I call all representations pure, in the transcendental meaning of the
word, wherein nothing is met with that belongs to sensation. And
accordingly we find existing in the mind à priori, the pure form of
sensuous intuitions in general, in which all the manifold content of
the phenomenal world is arranged and viewed under certain relations.
This pure form of sensibility I shall call pure intuition. Thus, if I
take away from our representation of a body all that the understanding
thinks as belonging to it, as substance, force, divisibility, etc., and
also whatever belongs to sensation, as impenetrability, hardness,
colour, etc.; yet there is still something left us from this empirical
intuition, namely, extension and shape. These belong to pure intuition,
which exists à priori in the mind, as a mere form of sensibility, and
without any real object of the senses or any sensation.

The science of all the principles of sensibility à priori, I call
transcendental æsthetic.[10] There must, then, be such a science
forming the first part of the transcendental doctrine of elements, in
contradistinction to that part which contains the principles of pure
thought, and which is called transcendental logic.

 [10] The Germans are the only people who at present use this word to
 indicate what others call the critique of taste. At the foundation of
 this term lies the disappointed hope, which the eminent analyst,
 Baumgarten, conceived, of subjecting the criticism of the beautiful to
 principles of reason, and so of elevating its rules into a science.
 But his endeavours were vain. For the said rules or criteria are, in
 respect to their chief sources, merely empirical, consequently never
 can serve as determinate laws à priori, by which our judgement in
 matters of taste is to be directed. It is rather our judgement which
 forms the proper test as to the correctness of the principles. On this
 account it is advisable to give up the use of the term as designating
 the critique of taste, and to apply it solely to that doctrine, which
 is true science—the science of the laws of sensibility—and thus come
 nearer to the language and the sense of the ancients in their
 well-known division of the objects of cognition into aiotheta kai
 noeta, or to share it with speculative philosophy, and employ it
 partly in a transcendental, partly in a psychological signification.

In the science of transcendental æsthetic accordingly, we shall first
isolate sensibility or the sensuous faculty, by separating from it all
that is annexed to its perceptions by the conceptions of understanding,
so that nothing be left but empirical intuition. In the next place we
shall take away from this intuition all that belongs to sensation, so
that nothing may remain but pure intuition, and the mere form of
phenomena, which is all that the sensibility can afford à priori. From
this investigation it will be found that there are two pure forms of
sensuous intuition, as principles of knowledge à priori, namely, space
and time. To the consideration of these we shall now proceed.

SECTION I. Of Space.

§ 2. Metaphysical Exposition of this Conception.

By means of the external sense (a property of the mind), we represent
to ourselves objects as without us, and these all in space. Herein
alone are their shape, dimensions, and relations to each other
determined or determinable. The internal sense, by means of which the
mind contemplates itself or its internal state, gives, indeed, no
intuition of the soul as an object; yet there is nevertheless a
determinate form, under which alone the contemplation of our internal
state is possible, so that all which relates to the inward
determinations of the mind is represented in relations of time. Of time
we cannot have any external intuition, any more than we can have an
internal intuition of space. What then are time and space? Are they
real existences? Or, are they merely relations or determinations of
things, such, however, as would equally belong to these things in
themselves, though they should never become objects of intuition; or,
are they such as belong only to the form of intuition, and consequently
to the subjective constitution of the mind, without which these
predicates of time and space could not be attached to any object? In
order to become informed on these points, we shall first give an
exposition of the conception of space. By exposition, I mean the clear,
though not detailed, representation of that which belongs to a
conception; and an exposition is metaphysical when it contains that
which represents the conception as given à priori.

1. Space is not a conception which has been derived from outward
experiences. For, in order that certain sensations may relate to
something without me (that is, to something which occupies a different
part of space from that in which I am); in like manner, in order that I
may represent them not merely as without, of, and near to each other,
but also in separate places, the representation of space must already
exist as a foundation. Consequently, the representation of space cannot
be borrowed from the relations of external phenomena through
experience; but, on the contrary, this external experience is itself
only possible through the said antecedent representation.

2. Space then is a necessary representation à priori, which serves for
the foundation of all external intuitions. We never can imagine or make
a representation to ourselves of the non-existence of space, though we
may easily enough think that no objects are found in it. It must,
therefore, be considered as the condition of the possibility of
phenomena, and by no means as a determination dependent on them, and is
a representation à priori, which necessarily supplies the basis for
external phenomena.

3. Space is no discursive, or as we say, general conception of the
relations of things, but a pure intuition. For, in the first place, we
can only represent to ourselves one space, and, when we talk of divers
spaces, we mean only parts of one and the same space. Moreover, these
parts cannot antecede this one all-embracing space, as the component
parts from which the aggregate can be made up, but can be cogitated
only as existing in it. Space is essentially one, and multiplicity in
it, consequently the general notion of spaces, of this or that space,
depends solely upon limitations. Hence it follows that an à priori
intuition (which is not empirical) lies at the root of all our
conceptions of space. Thus, moreover, the principles of geometry—for
example, that “in a triangle, two sides together are greater than the
third,” are never deduced from general conceptions of line and
triangle, but from intuition, and this à priori, with apodeictic
certainty.

4. Space is represented as an infinite given quantity. Now every
conception must indeed be considered as a representation which is
contained in an infinite multitude of different possible
representations, which, therefore, comprises these under itself; but no
conception, as such, can be so conceived, as if it contained within
itself an infinite multitude of representations. Nevertheless, space is
so conceived of, for all parts of space are equally capable of being
produced to infinity. Consequently, the original representation of
space is an intuition à priori, and not a conception.

§ 3. Transcendental Exposition of the Conception of Space.

By a transcendental exposition, I mean the explanation of a conception,
as a principle, whence can be discerned the possibility of other
synthetical à priori cognitions. For this purpose, it is requisite,
firstly, that such cognitions do really flow from the given conception;
and, secondly, that the said cognitions are only possible under the
presupposition of a given mode of explaining this conception.

Geometry is a science which determines the properties of space
synthetically, and yet à priori. What, then, must be our representation
of space, in order that such a cognition of it may be possible? It must
be originally intuition, for from a mere conception, no propositions
can be deduced which go out beyond the conception, and yet this happens
in geometry. (Introd. V.) But this intuition must be found in the mind
à priori, that is, before any perception of objects, consequently must
be pure, not empirical, intuition. For geometrical principles are
always apodeictic, that is, united with the consciousness of their
necessity, as: “Space has only three dimensions.” But propositions of
this kind cannot be empirical judgements, nor conclusions from them.
(Introd. II.) Now, how can an external intuition anterior to objects
themselves, and in which our conception of objects can be determined à
priori, exist in the human mind? Obviously not otherwise than in so far
as it has its seat in the subject only, as the formal capacity of the
subject’s being affected by objects, and thereby of obtaining immediate
representation, that is, intuition; consequently, only as the form of
the external sense in general.

Thus it is only by means of our explanation that the possibility of
geometry, as a synthetical science à priori, becomes comprehensible.
Every mode of explanation which does not show us this possibility,
although in appearance it may be similar to ours, can with the utmost
certainty be distinguished from it by these marks.

§ 4. Conclusions from the foregoing Conceptions.

(a) Space does not represent any property of objects as things in
themselves, nor does it represent them in their relations to each
other; in other words, space does not represent to us any determination
of objects such as attaches to the objects themselves, and would
remain, even though all subjective conditions of the intuition were
abstracted. For neither absolute nor relative determinations of objects
can be intuited prior to the existence of the things to which they
belong, and therefore not à priori.

(b) Space is nothing else than the form of all phenomena of the
external sense, that is, the subjective condition of the sensibility,
under which alone external intuition is possible. Now, because the
receptivity or capacity of the subject to be affected by objects
necessarily antecedes all intuitions of these objects, it is easily
understood how the form of all phenomena can be given in the mind
previous to all actual perceptions, therefore à priori, and how it, as
a pure intuition, in which all objects must be determined, can contain
principles of the relations of these objects prior to all experience.

It is therefore from the human point of view only that we can speak of
space, extended objects, etc. If we depart from the subjective
condition, under which alone we can obtain external intuition, or, in
other words, by means of which we are affected by objects, the
representation of space has no meaning whatsoever. This predicate is
only applicable to things in so far as they appear to us, that is, are
objects of sensibility. The constant form of this receptivity, which we
call sensibility, is a necessary condition of all relations in which
objects can be intuited as existing without us, and when abstraction of
these objects is made, is a pure intuition, to which we give the name
of space. It is clear that we cannot make the special conditions of
sensibility into conditions of the possibility of things, but only of
the possibility of their existence as far as they are phenomena. And so
we may correctly say that space contains all which can appear to us
externally, but not all things considered as things in themselves, be
they intuited or not, or by whatsoever subject one will. As to the
intuitions of other thinking beings, we cannot judge whether they are
or are not bound by the same conditions which limit our own intuition,
and which for us are universally valid. If we join the limitation of a
judgement to the conception of the subject, then the judgement will
possess unconditioned validity. For example, the proposition, “All
objects are beside each other in space,” is valid only under the
limitation that these things are taken as objects of our sensuous
intuition. But if I join the condition to the conception and say, “All
things, as external phenomena, are beside each other in space,” then
the rule is valid universally, and without any limitation. Our
expositions, consequently, teach the reality (i.e., the objective
validity) of space in regard of all which can be presented to us
externally as object, and at the same time also the ideality of space
in regard to objects when they are considered by means of reason as
things in themselves, that is, without reference to the constitution of
our sensibility. We maintain, therefore, the empirical reality of space
in regard to all possible external experience, although we must admit
its transcendental ideality; in other words, that it is nothing, so
soon as we withdraw the condition upon which the possibility of all
experience depends and look upon space as something that belongs to
things in themselves.

But, with the exception of space, there is no representation,
subjective and referring to something external to us, which could be
called objective à priori. For there are no other subjective
representations from which we can deduce synthetical propositions à
priori, as we can from the intuition of space. (See § 3.) Therefore, to
speak accurately, no ideality whatever belongs to these, although they
agree in this respect with the representation of space, that they
belong merely to the subjective nature of the mode of sensuous
perception; such a mode, for example, as that of sight, of hearing, and
of feeling, by means of the sensations of colour, sound, and heat, but
which, because they are only sensations and not intuitions, do not of
themselves give us the cognition of any object, least of all, an à
priori cognition. My purpose, in the above remark, is merely this: to
guard any one against illustrating the asserted ideality of space by
examples quite insufficient, for example, by colour, taste, etc.; for
these must be contemplated not as properties of things, but only as
changes in the subject, changes which may be different in different
men. For, in such a case, that which is originally a mere phenomenon, a
rose, for example, is taken by the empirical understanding for a thing
in itself, though to every different eye, in respect of its colour, it
may appear different. On the contrary, the transcendental conception of
phenomena in space is a critical admonition, that, in general, nothing
which is intuited in space is a thing in itself, and that space is not
a form which belongs as a property to things; but that objects are
quite unknown to us in themselves, and what we call outward objects,
are nothing else but mere representations of our sensibility, whose
form is space, but whose real correlate, the thing in itself, is not
known by means of these representations, nor ever can be, but
respecting which, in experience, no inquiry is ever made.

SECTION II. Of Time.

§ 5. Metaphysical Exposition of this Conception.

1. Time is not an empirical conception. For neither coexistence nor
succession would be perceived by us, if the representation of time did
not exist as a foundation à priori. Without this presupposition we
could not represent to ourselves that things exist together at one and
the same time, or at different times, that is, contemporaneously, or in
succession.

2. Time is a necessary representation, lying at the foundation of all
our intuitions. With regard to phenomena in general, we cannot think
away time from them, and represent them to ourselves as out of and
unconnected with time, but we can quite well represent to ourselves
time void of phenomena. Time is therefore given à priori. In it alone
is all reality of phenomena possible. These may all be annihilated in
thought, but time itself, as the universal condition of their
possibility, cannot be so annulled.

3. On this necessity à priori is also founded the possibility of
apodeictic principles of the relations of time, or axioms of time in
general, such as: “Time has only one dimension,” “Different times are
not coexistent but successive” (as different spaces are not successive
but coexistent). These principles cannot be derived from experience,
for it would give neither strict universality, nor apodeictic
certainty. We should only be able to say, “so common experience teaches
us,” but not “it must be so.” They are valid as rules, through which,
in general, experience is possible; and they instruct us respecting
experience, and not by means of it.

4. Time is not a discursive, or as it is called, general conception,
but a pure form of the sensuous intuition. Different times are merely
parts of one and the same time. But the representation which can only
be given by a single object is an intuition. Besides, the proposition
that different times cannot be coexistent could not be derived from a
general conception. For this proposition is synthetical, and therefore
cannot spring out of conceptions alone. It is therefore contained
immediately in the intuition and representation of time.

5. The infinity of time signifies nothing more than that every
determined quantity of time is possible only through limitations of one
time lying at the foundation. Consequently, the original
representation, time, must be given as unlimited. But as the
determinate representation of the parts of time and of every quantity
of an object can only be obtained by limitation, the complete
representation of time must not be furnished by means of conceptions,
for these contain only partial representations. Conceptions, on the
contrary, must have immediate intuition for their basis.

§ 6 Transcendental Exposition of the Conception of Time.

I may here refer to what is said above (§ 5, 3), where, for or sake of
brevity, I have placed under the head of metaphysical exposition, that
which is properly transcendental. Here I shall add that the conception
of change, and with it the conception of motion, as change of place, is
possible only through and in the representation of time; that if this
representation were not an intuition (internal) à priori, no
conception, of whatever kind, could render comprehensible the
possibility of change, in other words, of a conjunction of
contradictorily opposed predicates in one and the same object, for
example, the presence of a thing in a place and the non-presence of the
same thing in the same place. It is only in time that it is possible to
meet with two contradictorily opposed determinations in one thing, that
is, after each other. Thus our conception of time explains the
possibility of so much synthetical knowledge à priori, as is exhibited
in the general doctrine of motion, which is not a little fruitful.

§ 7. Conclusions from the above Conceptions.

(a) Time is not something which subsists of itself, or which inheres in
things as an objective determination, and therefore remains, when
abstraction is made of the subjective conditions of the intuition of
things. For in the former case, it would be something real, yet without
presenting to any power of perception any real object. In the latter
case, as an order or determination inherent in things themselves, it
could not be antecedent to things, as their condition, nor discerned or
intuited by means of synthetical propositions à priori. But all this is
quite possible when we regard time as merely the subjective condition
under which all our intuitions take place. For in that case, this form
of the inward intuition can be represented prior to the objects, and
consequently à priori.

(b) Time is nothing else than the form of the internal sense, that is,
of the intuitions of self and of our internal state. For time cannot be
any determination of outward phenomena. It has to do neither with shape
nor position; on the contrary, it determines the relation of
representations in our internal state. And precisely because this
internal intuition presents to us no shape or form, we endeavour to
supply this want by analogies, and represent the course of time by a
line progressing to infinity, the content of which constitutes a series
which is only of one dimension; and we conclude from the properties of
this line as to all the properties of time, with this single exception,
that the parts of the line are coexistent, whilst those of time are
successive. From this it is clear also that the representation of time
is itself an intuition, because all its relations can be expressed in
an external intuition.

(c) Time is the formal condition à priori of all phenomena whatsoever.
Space, as the pure form of external intuition, is limited as a
condition à priori to external phenomena alone. On the other hand,
because all representations, whether they have or have not external
things for their objects, still in themselves, as determinations of the
mind, belong to our internal state; and because this internal state is
subject to the formal condition of the internal intuition, that is, to
time—time is a condition à priori of all phenomena whatsoever—the
immediate condition of all internal, and thereby the mediate condition
of all external phenomena. If I can say à priori, “All outward
phenomena are in space, and determined à priori according to the
relations of space,” I can also, from the principle of the internal
sense, affirm universally, “All phenomena in general, that is, all
objects of the senses, are in time and stand necessarily in relations
of time.”

If we abstract our internal intuition of ourselves and all external
intuitions, possible only by virtue of this internal intuition and
presented to us by our faculty of representation, and consequently take
objects as they are in themselves, then time is nothing. It is only of
objective validity in regard to phenomena, because these are things
which we regard as objects of our senses. It no longer objective we,
make abstraction of the sensuousness of our intuition, in other words,
of that mode of representation which is peculiar to us, and speak of
things in general. Time is therefore merely a subjective condition of
our (human) intuition (which is always sensuous, that is, so far as we
are affected by objects), and in itself, independently of the mind or
subject, is nothing. Nevertheless, in respect of all phenomena,
consequently of all things which come within the sphere of our
experience, it is necessarily objective. We cannot say, “All things are
in time,” because in this conception of things in general, we abstract
and make no mention of any sort of intuition of things. But this is the
proper condition under which time belongs to our representation of
objects. If we add the condition to the conception, and say, “All
things, as phenomena, that is, objects of sensuous intuition, are in
time,” then the proposition has its sound objective validity and
universality à priori.

What we have now set forth teaches, therefore, the empirical reality of
time; that is, its objective validity in reference to all objects which
can ever be presented to our senses. And as our intuition is always
sensuous, no object ever can be presented to us in experience, which
does not come under the conditions of time. On the other hand, we deny
to time all claim to absolute reality; that is, we deny that it,
without having regard to the form of our sensuous intuition, absolutely
inheres in things as a condition or property. Such properties as belong
to objects as things in themselves never can be presented to us through
the medium of the senses. Herein consists, therefore, the
transcendental ideality of time, according to which, if we abstract the
subjective conditions of sensuous intuition, it is nothing, and cannot
be reckoned as subsisting or inhering in objects as things in
themselves, independently of its relation to our intuition. This
ideality, like that of space, is not to be proved or illustrated by
fallacious analogies with sensations, for this reason—that in such
arguments or illustrations, we make the presupposition that the
phenomenon, in which such and such predicates inhere, has objective
reality, while in this case we can only find such an objective reality
as is itself empirical, that is, regards the object as a mere
phenomenon. In reference to this subject, see the remark in Section I
(§ 4)

§ 8. Elucidation.

Against this theory, which grants empirical reality to time, but denies
to it absolute and transcendental reality, I have heard from
intelligent men an objection so unanimously urged that I conclude that
it must naturally present itself to every reader to whom these
considerations are novel. It runs thus: “Changes are real” (this the
continual change in our own representations demonstrates, even though
the existence of all external phenomena, together with their changes,
is denied). Now, changes are only possible in time, and therefore time
must be something real. But there is no difficulty in answering this. I
grant the whole argument. Time, no doubt, is something real, that is,
it is the real form of our internal intuition. It therefore has
subjective reality, in reference to our internal experience, that is, I
have really the representation of time and of my determinations
therein. Time, therefore, is not to be regarded as an object, but as
the mode of representation of myself as an object. But if I could
intuite myself, or be intuited by another being, without this condition
of sensibility, then those very determinations which we now represent
to ourselves as changes, would present to us a knowledge in which the
representation of time, and consequently of change, would not appear.
The empirical reality of time, therefore, remains, as the condition of
all our experience. But absolute reality, according to what has been
said above, cannot be granted it. Time is nothing but the form of our
internal intuition.[11] If we take away from it the special condition
of our sensibility, the conception of time also vanishes; and it
inheres not in the objects themselves, but solely in the subject (or
mind) which intuites them.

 [11] I can indeed say “my representations follow one another, or are
 successive”; but this means only that we are conscious of them as in a
 succession, that is, according to the form of the internal sense.
 Time, therefore, is not a thing in itself, nor is it any objective
 determination pertaining to, or inherent in things.

But the reason why this objection is so unanimously brought against our
doctrine of time, and that too by disputants who cannot start any
intelligible arguments against the doctrine of the ideality of space,
is this—they have no hope of demonstrating apodeictically the absolute
reality of space, because the doctrine of idealism is against them,
according to which the reality of external objects is not capable of
any strict proof. On the other hand, the reality of the object of our
internal sense (that is, myself and my internal state) is clear
immediately through consciousness. The former—external objects in
space—might be a mere delusion, but the latter—the object of my
internal perception—is undeniably real. They do not, however, reflect
that both, without question of their reality as representations, belong
only to the genus phenomenon, which has always two aspects, the one,
the object considered as a thing in itself, without regard to the mode
of intuiting it, and the nature of which remains for this very reason
problematical, the other, the form of our intuition of the object,
which must be sought not in the object as a thing in itself, but in the
subject to which it appears—which form of intuition nevertheless
belongs really and necessarily to the phenomenal object.

Time and space are, therefore, two sources of knowledge, from which, à
priori, various synthetical cognitions can be drawn. Of this we find a
striking example in the cognitions of space and its relations, which
form the foundation of pure mathematics. They are the two pure forms of
all intuitions, and thereby make synthetical propositions à priori
possible. But these sources of knowledge being merely conditions of our
sensibility, do therefore, and as such, strictly determine their own
range and purpose, in that they do not and cannot present objects as
things in themselves, but are applicable to them solely in so far as
they are considered as sensuous phenomena. The sphere of phenomena is
the only sphere of their validity, and if we venture out of this, no
further objective use can be made of them. For the rest, this formal
reality of time and space leaves the validity of our empirical
knowledge unshaken; for our certainty in that respect is equally firm,
whether these forms necessarily inhere in the things themselves, or
only in our intuitions of them. On the other hand, those who maintain
the absolute reality of time and space, whether as essentially
subsisting, or only inhering, as modifications, in things, must find
themselves at utter variance with the principles of experience itself.
For, if they decide for the first view, and make space and time into
substances, this being the side taken by mathematical natural
philosophers, they must admit two self-subsisting nonentities, infinite
and eternal, which exist (yet without there being anything real) for
the purpose of containing in themselves everything that is real. If
they adopt the second view of inherence, which is preferred by some
metaphysical natural philosophers, and regard space and time as
relations (contiguity in space or succession in time), abstracted from
experience, though represented confusedly in this state of separation,
they find themselves in that case necessitated to deny the validity of
mathematical doctrines à priori in reference to real things (for
example, in space)—at all events their apodeictic certainty. For such
certainty cannot be found in an à posteriori proposition; and the
conceptions à priori of space and time are, according to this opinion,
mere creations of the imagination, having their source really in
experience, inasmuch as, out of relations abstracted from experience,
imagination has made up something which contains, indeed, general
statements of these relations, yet of which no application can be made
without the restrictions attached thereto by nature. The former of
these parties gains this advantage, that they keep the sphere of
phenomena free for mathematical science. On the other hand, these very
conditions (space and time) embarrass them greatly, when the
understanding endeavours to pass the limits of that sphere. The latter
has, indeed, this advantage, that the representations of space and time
do not come in their way when they wish to judge of objects, not as
phenomena, but merely in their relation to the understanding. Devoid,
however, of a true and objectively valid à priori intuition, they can
neither furnish any basis for the possibility of mathematical
cognitions à priori, nor bring the propositions of experience into
necessary accordance with those of mathematics. In our theory of the
true nature of these two original forms of the sensibility, both
difficulties are surmounted.

In conclusion, that transcendental æsthetic cannot contain any more
than these two elements—space and time, is sufficiently obvious from
the fact that all other conceptions appertaining to sensibility, even
that of motion, which unites in itself both elements, presuppose
something empirical. Motion, for example, presupposes the perception of
something movable. But space considered in itself contains nothing
movable, consequently motion must be something which is found in space
only through experience—in other words, an empirical datum. In like
manner, transcendental æsthetic cannot number the conception of change
among its data à priori; for time itself does not change, but only
something which is in time. To acquire the conception of change,
therefore, the perception of some existing object and of the succession
of its determinations, in one word, experience, is necessary.

§ 9. General Remarks on Transcendental Æsthetic.

I. In order to prevent any misunderstanding, it will be requisite, in
the first place, to recapitulate, as clearly as possible, what our
opinion is with respect to the fundamental nature of our sensuous
cognition in general. We have intended, then, to say that all our
intuition is nothing but the representation of phenomena; that the
things which we intuite, are not in themselves the same as our
representations of them in intuition, nor are their relations in
themselves so constituted as they appear to us; and that if we take
away the subject, or even only the subjective constitution of our
senses in general, then not only the nature and relations of objects in
space and time, but even space and time themselves disappear; and that
these, as phenomena, cannot exist in themselves, but only in us. What
may be the nature of objects considered as things in themselves and
without reference to the receptivity of our sensibility is quite
unknown to us. We know nothing more than our mode of perceiving them,
which is peculiar to us, and which, though not of necessity pertaining
to every animated being, is so to the whole human race. With this alone
we have to do. Space and time are the pure forms thereof; sensation the
matter. The former alone can we cognize à priori, that is, antecedent
to all actual perception; and for this reason such cognition is called
pure intuition. The latter is that in our cognition which is called
cognition à posteriori, that is, empirical intuition. The former
appertain absolutely and necessarily to our sensibility, of whatsoever
kind our sensations may be; the latter may be of very diversified
character. Supposing that we should carry our empirical intuition even
to the very highest degree of clearness, we should not thereby advance
one step nearer to a knowledge of the constitution of objects as things
in themselves. For we could only, at best, arrive at a complete
cognition of our own mode of intuition, that is of our sensibility, and
this always under the conditions originally attaching to the subject,
namely, the conditions of space and time; while the question: “What are
objects considered as things in themselves?” remains unanswerable even
after the most thorough examination of the phenomenal world.

To say, then, that all our sensibility is nothing but the confused
representation of things containing exclusively that which belongs to
them as things in themselves, and this under an accumulation of
characteristic marks and partial representations which we cannot
distinguish in consciousness, is a falsification of the conception of
sensibility and phenomenization, which renders our whole doctrine
thereof empty and useless. The difference between a confused and a
clear representation is merely logical and has nothing to do with
content. No doubt the conception of right, as employed by a sound
understanding, contains all that the most subtle investigation could
unfold from it, although, in the ordinary practical use of the word, we
are not conscious of the manifold representations comprised in the
conception. But we cannot for this reason assert that the ordinary
conception is a sensuous one, containing a mere phenomenon, for right
cannot appear as a phenomenon; but the conception of it lies in the
understanding, and represents a property (the moral property) of
actions, which belongs to them in themselves. On the other hand, the
representation in intuition of a body contains nothing which could
belong to an object considered as a thing in itself, but merely the
phenomenon or appearance of something, and the mode in which we are
affected by that appearance; and this receptivity of our faculty of
cognition is called sensibility, and remains toto caelo different from
the cognition of an object in itself, even though we should examine the
content of the phenomenon to the very bottom.

It must be admitted that the Leibnitz-Wolfian philosophy has assigned
an entirely erroneous point of view to all investigations into the
nature and origin of our cognitions, inasmuch as it regards the
distinction between the sensuous and the intellectual as merely
logical, whereas it is plainly transcendental, and concerns not merely
the clearness or obscurity, but the content and origin of both. For the
faculty of sensibility not only does not present us with an indistinct
and confused cognition of objects as things in themselves, but, in
fact, gives us no knowledge of these at all. On the contrary, so soon
as we abstract in thought our own subjective nature, the object
represented, with the properties ascribed to it by sensuous intuition,
entirely disappears, because it was only this subjective nature that
determined the form of the object as a phenomenon.

In phenomena, we commonly, indeed, distinguish that which essentially
belongs to the intuition of them, and is valid for the sensuous faculty
of every human being, from that which belongs to the same intuition
accidentally, as valid not for the sensuous faculty in general, but for
a particular state or organization of this or that sense. Accordingly,
we are accustomed to say that the former is a cognition which
represents the object itself, whilst the latter presents only a
particular appearance or phenomenon thereof. This distinction, however,
is only empirical. If we stop here (as is usual), and do not regard the
empirical intuition as itself a mere phenomenon (as we ought to do), in
which nothing that can appertain to a thing in itself is to be found,
our transcendental distinction is lost, and we believe that we cognize
objects as things in themselves, although in the whole range of the
sensuous world, investigate the nature of its objects as profoundly as
we may, we have to do with nothing but phenomena. Thus, we call the
rainbow a mere appearance of phenomenon in a sunny shower, and the
rain, the reality or thing in itself; and this is right enough, if we
understand the latter conception in a merely physical sense, that is,
as that which in universal experience, and under whatever conditions of
sensuous perception, is known in intuition to be so and so determined,
and not otherwise. But if we consider this empirical datum generally,
and inquire, without reference to its accordance with all our senses,
whether there can be discovered in it aught which represents an object
as a thing in itself (the raindrops of course are not such, for they
are, as phenomena, empirical objects), the question of the relation of
the representation to the object is transcendental; and not only are
the raindrops mere phenomena, but even their circular form, nay, the
space itself through which they fall, is nothing in itself, but both
are mere modifications or fundamental dispositions of our sensuous
intuition, whilst the transcendental object remains for us utterly
unknown.

The second important concern of our æsthetic is that it does not obtain
favour merely as a plausible hypothesis, but possess as undoubted a
character of certainty as can be demanded of any theory which is to
serve for an organon. In order fully to convince the reader of this
certainty, we shall select a case which will serve to make its validity
apparent, and also to illustrate what has been said in § 3.

Suppose, then, that space and time are in themselves objective, and
conditions of the—possibility of objects as things in themselves. In
the first place, it is evident that both present us, with very many
apodeictic and synthetic propositions à priori, but especially
space—and for this reason we shall prefer it for investigation at
present. As the propositions of geometry are cognized synthetically à
priori, and with apodeictic certainty, I inquire: Whence do you obtain
propositions of this kind, and on what basis does the understanding
rest, in order to arrive at such absolutely necessary and universally
valid truths?

There is no other way than through intuitions or conceptions, as such;
and these are given either à priori or à posteriori. The latter,
namely, empirical conceptions, together with the empirical intuition on
which they are founded, cannot afford any synthetical proposition,
except such as is itself also empirical, that is, a proposition of
experience. But an empirical proposition cannot possess the qualities
of necessity and absolute universality, which, nevertheless, are the
characteristics of all geometrical propositions. As to the first and
only means to arrive at such cognitions, namely, through mere
conceptions or intuitions à priori, it is quite clear that from mere
conceptions no synthetical cognitions, but only analytical ones, can be
obtained. Take, for example, the proposition: “Two straight lines
cannot enclose a space, and with these alone no figure is possible,”
and try to deduce it from the conception of a straight line and the
number two; or take the proposition: “It is possible to construct a
figure with three straight lines,” and endeavour, in like manner, to
deduce it from the mere conception of a straight line and the number
three. All your endeavours are in vain, and you find yourself forced to
have recourse to intuition, as, in fact, geometry always does. You
therefore give yourself an object in intuition. But of what kind is
this intuition? Is it a pure à priori, or is it an empirical intuition?
If the latter, then neither an universally valid, much less an
apodeictic proposition can arise from it, for experience never can give
us any such proposition. You must, therefore, give yourself an object à
priori in intuition, and upon that ground your synthetical proposition.
Now if there did not exist within you a faculty of intuition à priori;
if this subjective condition were not in respect to its form also the
universal condition à priori under which alone the object of this
external intuition is itself possible; if the object (that is, the
triangle) were something in itself, without relation to you the
subject; how could you affirm that that which lies necessarily in your
subjective conditions in order to construct a triangle, must also
necessarily belong to the triangle in itself? For to your conceptions
of three lines, you could not add anything new (that is, the figure);
which, therefore, must necessarily be found in the object, because the
object is given before your cognition, and not by means of it. If,
therefore, space (and time also) were not a mere form of your
intuition, which contains conditions à priori, under which alone things
can become external objects for you, and without which subjective
conditions the objects are in themselves nothing, you could not
construct any synthetical proposition whatsoever regarding external
objects. It is therefore not merely possible or probable, but
indubitably certain, that space and time, as the necessary conditions
of all our external and internal experience, are merely subjective
conditions of all our intuitions, in relation to which all objects are
therefore mere phenomena, and not things in themselves, presented to us
in this particular manner. And for this reason, in respect to the form
of phenomena, much may be said à priori, whilst of the thing in itself,
which may lie at the foundation of these phenomena, it is impossible to
say anything.

II. In confirmation of this theory of the ideality of the external as
well as internal sense, consequently of all objects of sense, as mere
phenomena, we may especially remark that all in our cognition that
belongs to intuition contains nothing more than mere relations. (The
feelings of pain and pleasure, and the will, which are not cognitions,
are excepted.) The relations, to wit, of place in an intuition
(extension), change of place (motion), and laws according to which this
change is determined (moving forces). That, however, which is present
in this or that place, or any operation going on, or result taking
place in the things themselves, with the exception of change of place,
is not given to us by intuition. Now by means of mere relations, a
thing cannot be known in itself; and it may therefore be fairly
concluded, that, as through the external sense nothing but mere
representations of relations are given us, the said external sense in
its representation can contain only the relation of the object to the
subject, but not the essential nature of the object as a thing in
itself.

The same is the case with the internal intuition, not only because, in
the internal intuition, the representation of the external senses
constitutes the material with which the mind is occupied; but because
time, in which we place, and which itself antecedes the consciousness
of, these representations in experience, and which, as the formal
condition of the mode according to which objects are placed in the
mind, lies at the foundation of them, contains relations of the
successive, the coexistent, and of that which always must be coexistent
with succession, the permanent. Now that which, as representation, can
antecede every exercise of thought (of an object), is intuition; and
when it contains nothing but relations, it is the form of the
intuition, which, as it presents us with no representation, except in
so far as something is placed in the mind, can be nothing else than the
mode in which the mind is affected by its own activity, to wit—its
presenting to itself representations, consequently the mode in which
the mind is affected by itself; that is, it can be nothing but an
internal sense in respect to its form. Everything that is represented
through the medium of sense is so far phenomenal; consequently, we must
either refuse altogether to admit an internal sense, or the subject,
which is the object of that sense, could only be represented by it as
phenomenon, and not as it would judge of itself, if its intuition were
pure spontaneous activity, that is, were intellectual. The difficulty
here lies wholly in the question: How can the subject have an internal
intuition of itself? But this difficulty is common to every theory. The
consciousness of self (apperception) is the simple representation of
the “ego”; and if by means of that representation alone, all the
manifold representations in the subject were spontaneously given, then
our internal intuition would be intellectual. This consciousness in man
requires an internal perception of the manifold representations which
are previously given in the subject; and the manner in which these
representations are given in the mind without spontaneity, must, on
account of this difference (the want of spontaneity), be called
sensibility. If the faculty of self-consciousness is to apprehend what
lies in the mind, it must all act that and can in this way alone
produce an intuition of self. But the form of this intuition, which
lies in the original constitution of the mind, determines, in the
representation of time, the manner in which the manifold
representations are to combine themselves in the mind; since the
subject intuites itself, not as it would represent itself immediately
and spontaneously, but according to the manner in which the mind is
internally affected, consequently, as it appears, and not as it is.

III. When we say that the intuition of external objects, and also the
self-intuition of the subject, represent both, objects and subject, in
space and time, as they affect our senses, that is, as they appear—this
is by no means equivalent to asserting that these objects are mere
illusory appearances. For when we speak of things as phenomena, the
objects, nay, even the properties which we ascribe to them, are looked
upon as really given; only that, in so far as this or that property
depends upon the mode of intuition of the subject, in the relation of
the given object to the subject, the object as phenomenon is to be
distinguished from the object as a thing in itself. Thus I do not say
that bodies seem or appear to be external to me, or that my soul seems
merely to be given in my self-consciousness, although I maintain that
the properties of space and time, in conformity to which I set both, as
the condition of their existence, abide in my mode of intuition, and
not in the objects in themselves. It would be my own fault, if out of
that which I should reckon as phenomenon, I made mere illusory
appearance.[12] But this will not happen, because of our principle of
the ideality of all sensuous intuitions. On the contrary, if we ascribe
objective reality to these forms of representation, it becomes
impossible to avoid changing everything into mere appearance. For if we
regard space and time as properties, which must be found in objects as
things in themselves, as sine quibus non of the possibility of their
existence, and reflect on the absurdities in which we then find
ourselves involved, inasmuch as we are compelled to admit the existence
of two infinite things, which are nevertheless not substances, nor
anything really inhering in substances, nay, to admit that they are the
necessary conditions of the existence of all things, and moreover, that
they must continue to exist, although all existing things were
annihilated—we cannot blame the good Berkeley for degrading bodies to
mere illusory appearances. Nay, even our own existence, which would in
this case depend upon the self-existent reality of such a mere
nonentity as time, would necessarily be changed with it into mere
appearance—an absurdity which no one has as yet been guilty of.

 [12] The predicates of the phenomenon can be affixed to the object
 itself in relation to our sensuous faculty; for example, the red
 colour or the perfume to the rose. But (illusory) appearance never can
 be attributed as a predicate to an object, for this very reason, that
 it attributes to this object in itself that which belongs to it only
 in relation to our sensuous faculty, or to the subject in general,
 e.g., the two handles which were formerly ascribed to Saturn. That
 which is never to be found in the object itself, but always in the
 relation of the object to the subject, and which moreover is
 inseparable from our representation of the object, we denominate
 phenomenon. Thus the predicates of space and time are rightly
 attributed to objects of the senses as such, and in this there is no
 illusion. On the contrary, if I ascribe redness of the rose as a thing
 in itself, or to Saturn his handles, or extension to all external
 objects, considered as things in themselves, without regarding the
 determinate relation of these objects to the subject, and without
 limiting my judgement to that relation—then, and then only, arises
 illusion.

IV. In natural theology, where we think of an object—God—which never
can be an object of intuition to us, and even to himself can never be
an object of sensuous intuition, we carefully avoid attributing to his
intuition the conditions of space and time—and intuition all his
cognition must be, and not thought, which always includes limitation.
But with what right can we do this if we make them forms of objects as
things in themselves, and such, moreover, as would continue to exist as
à priori conditions of the existence of things, even though the things
themselves were annihilated? For as conditions of all existence in
general, space and time must be conditions of the existence of the
Supreme Being also. But if we do not thus make them objective forms of
all things, there is no other way left than to make them subjective
forms of our mode of intuition—external and internal; which is called
sensuous, because it is not primitive, that is, is not such as gives in
itself the existence of the object of the intuition (a mode of
intuition which, so far as we can judge, can belong only to the
Creator), but is dependent on the existence of the object, is possible,
therefore, only on condition that the representative faculty of the
subject is affected by the object.

It is, moreover, not necessary that we should limit the mode of
intuition in space and time to the sensuous faculty of man. It may well
be that all finite thinking beings must necessarily in this respect
agree with man (though as to this we cannot decide), but sensibility
does not on account of this universality cease to be sensibility, for
this very reason, that it is a deduced (intuitus derivativus), and not
an original (intuitus originarius), consequently not an intellectual
intuition, and this intuition, as such, for reasons above mentioned,
seems to belong solely to the Supreme Being, but never to a being
dependent, quoad its existence, as well as its intuition (which its
existence determines and limits relatively to given objects). This
latter remark, however, must be taken only as an illustration, and not
as any proof of the truth of our æsthetical theory.

§ 10. Conclusion of the Transcendental Æsthetic.

We have now completely before us one part of the solution of the grand
general problem of transcendental philosophy, namely, the question:
“How are synthetical propositions à priori possible?” That is to say,
we have shown that we are in possession of pure à priori intuitions,
namely, space and time, in which we find, when in a judgement à priori
we pass out beyond the given conception, something which is not
discoverable in that conception, but is certainly found à priori in the
intuition which corresponds to the conception, and can be united
synthetically with it. But the judgements which these pure intuitions
enable us to make, never reach farther than to objects of the senses,
and are valid only for objects of possible experience.

Second Part—TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC

INTRODUCTION. Idea of a Transcendental Logic.

I. Of Logic in General.

Our knowledge springs from two main sources in the mind, first of which
is the faculty or power of receiving representations (receptivity for
impressions); the second is the power of cognizing by means of these
representations (spontaneity in the production of conceptions). Through
the first an object is given to us; through the second, it is, in
relation to the representation (which is a mere determination of the
mind), thought. Intuition and conceptions constitute, therefore, the
elements of all our knowledge, so that neither conceptions without an
intuition in some way corresponding to them, nor intuition without
conceptions, can afford us a cognition. Both are either pure or
empirical. They are empirical, when sensation (which presupposes the
actual presence of the object) is contained in them; and pure, when no
sensation is mixed with the representation. Sensations we may call the
matter of sensuous cognition. Pure intuition consequently contains
merely the form under which something is intuited, and pure conception
only the form of the thought of an object. Only pure intuitions and
pure conceptions are possible à priori; the empirical only à
posteriori.

We apply the term sensibility to the receptivity of the mind for
impressions, in so far as it is in some way affected; and, on the other
hand, we call the faculty of spontaneously producing representations,
or the spontaneity of cognition, understanding. Our nature is so
constituted that intuition with us never can be other than sensuous,
that is, it contains only the mode in which we are affected by objects.
On the other hand, the faculty of thinking the object of sensuous
intuition is the understanding. Neither of these faculties has a
preference over the other. Without the sensuous faculty no object would
be given to us, and without the understanding no object would be
thought. Thoughts without content are void; intuitions without
conceptions, blind. Hence it is as necessary for the mind to make its
conceptions sensuous (that is, to join to them the object in
intuition), as to make its intuitions intelligible (that is, to bring
them under conceptions). Neither of these faculties can exchange its
proper function. Understanding cannot intuite, and the sensuous faculty
cannot think. In no other way than from the united operation of both,
can knowledge arise. But no one ought, on this account, to overlook the
difference of the elements contributed by each; we have rather great
reason carefully to separate and distinguish them. We therefore
distinguish the science of the laws of sensibility, that is, æsthetic,
from the science of the laws of the understanding, that is, logic.

Now, logic in its turn may be considered as twofold—namely, as logic of
the general, or of the particular use of the understanding. The first
contains the absolutely necessary laws of thought, without which no use
whatsoever of the understanding is possible, and gives laws therefore
to the understanding, without regard to the difference of objects on
which it may be employed. The logic of the particular use of the
understanding contains the laws of correct thinking upon a particular
class of objects. The former may be called elemental logic—the latter,
the organon of this or that particular science. The latter is for the
most part employed in the schools, as a propædeutic to the sciences,
although, indeed, according to the course of human reason, it is the
last thing we arrive at, when the science has been already matured, and
needs only the finishing touches towards its correction and completion;
for our knowledge of the objects of our attempted science must be
tolerably extensive and complete before we can indicate the laws by
which a science of these objects can be established.

General logic is again either pure or applied. In the former, we
abstract all the empirical conditions under which the understanding is
exercised; for example, the influence of the senses, the play of the
fantasy or imagination, the laws of the memory, the force of habit, of
inclination, etc., consequently also, the sources of prejudice—in a
word, we abstract all causes from which particular cognitions arise,
because these causes regard the understanding under certain
circumstances of its application, and, to the knowledge of them
experience is required. Pure general logic has to do, therefore, merely
with pure à priori principles, and is a canon of understanding and
reason, but only in respect of the formal part of their use, be the
content what it may, empirical or transcendental. General logic is
called applied, when it is directed to the laws of the use of the
understanding, under the subjective empirical conditions which
psychology teaches us. It has therefore empirical principles, although,
at the same time, it is in so far general, that it applies to the
exercise of the understanding, without regard to the difference of
objects. On this account, moreover, it is neither a canon of the
understanding in general, nor an organon of a particular science, but
merely a cathartic of the human understanding.

In general logic, therefore, that part which constitutes pure logic
must be carefully distinguished from that which constitutes applied
(though still general) logic. The former alone is properly science,
although short and dry, as the methodical exposition of an elemental
doctrine of the understanding ought to be. In this, therefore,
logicians must always bear in mind two rules:

1. As general logic, it makes abstraction of all content of the
cognition of the understanding, and of the difference of objects, and
has to do with nothing but the mere form of thought.

2. As pure logic, it has no empirical principles, and consequently
draws nothing (contrary to the common persuasion) from psychology,
which therefore has no influence on the canon of the understanding. It
is a demonstrated doctrine, and everything in it must be certain
completely à priori.

What I called applied logic (contrary to the common acceptation of this
term, according to which it should contain certain exercises for the
scholar, for which pure logic gives the rules), is a representation of
the understanding, and of the rules of its necessary employment in
concreto, that is to say, under the accidental conditions of the
subject, which may either hinder or promote this employment, and which
are all given only empirically. Thus applied logic treats of attention,
its impediments and consequences, of the origin of error, of the state
of doubt, hesitation, conviction, etc., and to it is related pure
general logic in the same way that pure morality, which contains only
the necessary moral laws of a free will, is related to practical
ethics, which considers these laws under all the impediments of
feelings, inclinations, and passions to which men are more or less
subjected, and which never can furnish us with a true and demonstrated
science, because it, as well as applied logic, requires empirical and
psychological principles.

II. Of Transcendental Logic.

General logic, as we have seen, makes abstraction of all content of
cognition, that is, of all relation of cognition to its object, and
regards only the logical form in the relation of cognitions to each
other, that is, the form of thought in general. But as we have both
pure and empirical intuitions (as transcendental æsthetic proves), in
like manner a distinction might be drawn between pure and empirical
thought (of objects). In this case, there would exist a kind of logic,
in which we should not make abstraction of all content of cognition;
for or logic which should comprise merely the laws of pure thought (of
an object), would of course exclude all those cognitions which were of
empirical content. This kind of logic would also examine the origin of
our cognitions of objects, so far as that origin cannot be ascribed to
the objects themselves; while, on the contrary, general logic has
nothing to do with the origin of our cognitions, but contemplates our
representations, be they given primitively à priori in ourselves, or be
they only of empirical origin, solely according to the laws which the
understanding observes in employing them in the process of thought, in
relation to each other. Consequently, general logic treats of the form
of the understanding only, which can be applied to representations,
from whatever source they may have arisen.

And here I shall make a remark, which the reader must bear well in mind
in the course of the following considerations, to wit, that not every
cognition à priori, but only those through which we cognize that and
how certain representations (intuitions or conceptions) are applied or
are possible only à priori; that is to say, the à priori possibility of
cognition and the à priori use of it are transcendental. Therefore
neither is space, nor any à priori geometrical determination of space,
a transcendental Representation, but only the knowledge that such a
representation is not of empirical origin, and the possibility of its
relating to objects of experience, although itself à priori, can be
called transcendental. So also, the application of space to objects in
general would be transcendental; but if it be limited to objects of
sense it is empirical. Thus, the distinction of the transcendental and
empirical belongs only to the critique of cognitions, and does not
concern the relation of these to their object.

Accordingly, in the expectation that there may perhaps be conceptions
which relate à priori to objects, not as pure or sensuous intuitions,
but merely as acts of pure thought (which are therefore conceptions,
but neither of empirical nor æsthetical origin)—in this expectation, I
say, we form to ourselves, by anticipation, the idea of a science of
pure understanding and rational cognition, by means of which we may
cogitate objects entirely à priori. A science of this kind, which
should determine the origin, the extent, and the objective validity of
such cognitions, must be called transcendental logic, because it has
not, like general logic, to do with the laws of understanding and
reason in relation to empirical as well as pure rational cognitions
without distinction, but concerns itself with these only in an à priori
relation to objects.

III. Of the Division of General Logic into Analytic and Dialectic.

The old question with which people sought to push logicians into a
corner, so that they must either have recourse to pitiful sophisms or
confess their ignorance, and consequently the vanity of their whole
art, is this: “What is truth?” The definition of the word truth, to
wit, “the accordance of the cognition with its object,” is presupposed
in the question; but we desire to be told, in the answer to it, what is
the universal and secure criterion of the truth of every cognition.

To know what questions we may reasonably propose is in itself a strong
evidence of sagacity and intelligence. For if a question be in itself
absurd and unsusceptible of a rational answer, it is attended with the
danger—not to mention the shame that falls upon the person who proposes
it—of seducing the unguarded listener into making absurd answers, and
we are presented with the ridiculous spectacle of one (as the ancients
said) “milking the he-goat, and the other holding a sieve.”

If truth consists in the accordance of a cognition with its object,
this object must be, ipso facto, distinguished from all others; for a
cognition is false if it does not accord with the object to which it
relates, although it contains something which may be affirmed of other
objects. Now an universal criterion of truth would be that which is
valid for all cognitions, without distinction of their objects. But it
is evident that since, in the case of such a criterion, we make
abstraction of all the content of a cognition (that is, of all relation
to its object), and truth relates precisely to this content, it must be
utterly absurd to ask for a mark of the truth of this content of
cognition; and that, accordingly, a sufficient, and at the same time
universal, test of truth cannot possibly be found. As we have already
termed the content of a cognition its matter, we shall say: “Of the
truth of our cognitions in respect of their matter, no universal test
can be demanded, because such a demand is self-contradictory.”

On the other hand, with regard to our cognition in respect of its mere
form (excluding all content), it is equally manifest that logic, in so
far as it exhibits the universal and necessary laws of the
understanding, must in these very laws present us with criteria of
truth. Whatever contradicts these rules is false, because thereby the
understanding is made to contradict its own universal laws of thought;
that is, to contradict itself. These criteria, however, apply solely to
the form of truth, that is, of thought in general, and in so far they
are perfectly accurate, yet not sufficient. For although a cognition
may be perfectly accurate as to logical form, that is, not
self-contradictory, it is notwithstanding quite possible that it may
not stand in agreement with its object. Consequently, the merely
logical criterion of truth, namely, the accordance of a cognition with
the universal and formal laws of understanding and reason, is nothing
more than the conditio sine qua non, or negative condition of all
truth. Farther than this logic cannot go, and the error which depends
not on the form, but on the content of the cognition, it has no test to
discover.

General logic, then, resolves the whole formal business of
understanding and reason into its elements, and exhibits them as
principles of all logical judging of our cognitions. This part of logic
may, therefore, be called analytic, and is at least the negative test
of truth, because all cognitions must first of an be estimated and
tried according to these laws before we proceed to investigate them in
respect of their content, in order to discover whether they contain
positive truth in regard to their object. Because, however, the mere
form of a cognition, accurately as it may accord with logical laws, is
insufficient to supply us with material (objective) truth, no one, by
means of logic alone, can venture to predicate anything of or decide
concerning objects, unless he has obtained, independently of logic,
well-grounded information about them, in order afterwards to examine,
according to logical laws, into the use and connection, in a cohering
whole, of that information, or, what is still better, merely to test it
by them. Notwithstanding, there lies so seductive a charm in the
possession of a specious art like this—an art which gives to all our
cognitions the form of the understanding, although with respect to the
content thereof we may be sadly deficient—that general logic, which is
merely a canon of judgement, has been employed as an organon for the
actual production, or rather for the semblance of production, of
objective assertions, and has thus been grossly misapplied. Now general
logic, in its assumed character of organon, is called dialectic.

Different as are the significations in which the ancients used this
term for a science or an art, we may safely infer, from their actual
employment of it, that with them it was nothing else than a logic of
illusion—a sophistical art for giving ignorance, nay, even intentional
sophistries, the colouring of truth, in which the thoroughness of
procedure which logic requires was imitated, and their topic employed
to cloak the empty pretensions. Now it may be taken as a safe and
useful warning, that general logic, considered as an organon, must
always be a logic of illusion, that is, be dialectical, for, as it
teaches us nothing whatever respecting the content of our cognitions,
but merely the formal conditions of their accordance with the
understanding, which do not relate to and are quite indifferent in
respect of objects, any attempt to employ it as an instrument (organon)
in order to extend and enlarge the range of our knowledge must end in
mere prating; any one being able to maintain or oppose, with some
appearance of truth, any single assertion whatever.

Such instruction is quite unbecoming the dignity of philosophy. For
these reasons we have chosen to denominate this part of logic
dialectic, in the sense of a critique of dialectical illusion, and we
wish the term to be so understood in this place.

IV. Of the Division of Transcendental Logic into Transcendental
Analytic and Dialectic.

In transcendental logic we isolate the understanding (as in
transcendental æsthetic the sensibility) and select from our cognition
merely that part of thought which has its origin in the understanding
alone. The exercise of this pure cognition, however, depends upon this
as its condition, that objects to which it may be applied be given to
us in intuition, for without intuition the whole of our cognition is
without objects, and is therefore quite void. That part of
transcendental logic, then, which treats of the elements of pure
cognition of the understanding, and of the principles without which no
object at all can be thought, is transcendental analytic, and at the
same time a logic of truth. For no cognition can contradict it, without
losing at the same time all content, that is, losing all reference to
an object, and therefore all truth. But because we are very easily
seduced into employing these pure cognitions and principles of the
understanding by themselves, and that even beyond the boundaries of
experience, which yet is the only source whence we can obtain matter
(objects) on which those pure conceptions may be employed—understanding
runs the risk of making, by means of empty sophisms, a material and
objective use of the mere formal principles of the pure understanding,
and of passing judgements on objects without distinction—objects which
are not given to us, nay, perhaps cannot be given to us in any way.
Now, as it ought properly to be only a canon for judging of the
empirical use of the understanding, this kind of logic is misused when
we seek to employ it as an organon of the universal and unlimited
exercise of the understanding, and attempt with the pure understanding
alone to judge synthetically, affirm, and determine respecting objects
in general. In this case the exercise of the pure understanding becomes
dialectical. The second part of our transcendental logic must therefore
be a critique of dialectical illusion, and this critique we shall term
transcendental dialectic—not meaning it as an art of producing
dogmatically such illusion (an art which is unfortunately too current
among the practitioners of metaphysical juggling), but as a critique of
understanding and reason in regard to their hyperphysical use. This
critique will expose the groundless nature of the pretensions of these
two faculties, and invalidate their claims to the discovery and
enlargement of our cognitions merely by means of transcendental
principles, and show that the proper employment of these faculties is
to test the judgements made by the pure understanding, and to guard it
from sophistical delusion.

FIRST DIVISION. TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC. TRANSCENDENTAL ANALYTIC. § 1

Transcendental analytic is the dissection of the whole of our à priori
knowledge into the elements of the pure cognition of the understanding.
In order to effect our purpose, it is necessary: (1) That the
conceptions be pure and not empirical; (2) That they belong not to
intuition and sensibility, but to thought and understanding; (3) That
they be elementary conceptions, and as such, quite different from
deduced or compound conceptions; (4) That our table of these elementary
conceptions be complete, and fill up the whole sphere of the pure
understanding. Now this completeness of a science cannot be accepted
with confidence on the guarantee of a mere estimate of its existence in
an aggregate formed only by means of repeated experiments and attempts.
The completeness which we require is possible only by means of an idea
of the totality of the à priori cognition of the understanding, and
through the thereby determined division of the conceptions which form
the said whole; consequently, only by means of their connection in a
system. Pure understanding distinguishes itself not merely from
everything empirical, but also completely from all sensibility. It is a
unity self-subsistent, self-sufficient, and not to be enlarged by any
additions from without. Hence the sum of its cognition constitutes a
system to be determined by and comprised under an idea; and the
completeness and articulation of this system can at the same time serve
as a test of the correctness and genuineness of all the parts of
cognition that belong to it. The whole of this part of transcendental
logic consists of two books, of which the one contains the conceptions,
and the other the principles of pure understanding.

BOOK I. Analytic of Conceptions. § 2

By the term Analytic of Conceptions, I do not understand the analysis
of these, or the usual process in philosophical investigations of
dissecting the conceptions which present themselves, according to their
content, and so making them clear; but I mean the hitherto little
attempted dissection of the faculty of understanding itself, in order
to investigate the possibility of conceptions à priori, by looking for
them in the understanding alone, as their birthplace, and analysing the
pure use of this faculty. For this is the proper duty of a
transcendental philosophy; what remains is the logical treatment of the
conceptions in philosophy in general. We shall therefore follow up the
pure conceptions even to their germs and beginnings in the human
understanding, in which they lie, until they are developed on occasions
presented by experience, and, freed by the same understanding from the
empirical conditions attaching to them, are set forth in their
unalloyed purity.

Chapter I. Of the Transcendental Clue to the Discovery of all Pure
Conceptions of the Understanding

Introductory § 3

When we call into play a faculty of cognition, different conceptions
manifest themselves according to the different circumstances, and make
known this faculty, and assemble themselves into a more or less
extensive collection, according to the time or penetration that has
been applied to the consideration of them. Where this process,
conducted as it is mechanically, so to speak, will end, cannot be
determined with certainty. Besides, the conceptions which we discover
in this haphazard manner present themselves by no means in order and
systematic unity, but are at last coupled together only according to
resemblances to each other, and arranged in series, according to the
quantity of their content, from the simpler to the more complex—series
which are anything but systematic, though not altogether without a
certain kind of method in their construction.

Transcendental philosophy has the advantage, and moreover the duty, of
searching for its conceptions according to a principle; because these
conceptions spring pure and unmixed out of the understanding as an
absolute unity, and therefore must be connected with each other
according to one conception or idea. A connection of this kind,
however, furnishes us with a ready prepared rule, by which its proper
place may be assigned to every pure conception of the understanding,
and the completeness of the system of all be determined à priori—both
which would otherwise have been dependent on mere choice or chance.

Section I. Of the Logical Use of the Understanding in General § 4

The understanding was defined above only negatively, as a non-sensuous
faculty of cognition. Now, independently of sensibility, we cannot
possibly have any intuition; consequently, the understanding is no
faculty of intuition. But besides intuition there is no other mode of
cognition, except through conceptions; consequently, the cognition of
every, at least of every human, understanding is a cognition through
conceptions—not intuitive, but discursive. All intuitions, as sensuous,
depend on affections; conceptions, therefore, upon functions. By the
word function I understand the unity of the act of arranging diverse
representations under one common representation. Conceptions, then, are
based on the spontaneity of thought, as sensuous intuitions are on the
receptivity of impressions. Now, the understanding cannot make any
other use of these conceptions than to judge by means of them. As no
representation, except an intuition, relates immediately to its object,
a conception never relates immediately to an object, but only to some
other representation thereof, be that an intuition or itself a
conception. A judgement, therefore, is the mediate cognition of an
object, consequently the representation of a representation of it. In
every judgement there is a conception which applies to, and is valid
for many other conceptions, and which among these comprehends also a
given representation, this last being immediately connected with an
object. For example, in the judgement—“All bodies are divisible,” our
conception of divisible applies to various other conceptions; among
these, however, it is here particularly applied to the conception of
body, and this conception of body relates to certain phenomena which
occur to us. These objects, therefore, are mediately represented by the
conception of divisibility. All judgements, accordingly, are functions
of unity in our representations, inasmuch as, instead of an immediate,
a higher representation, which comprises this and various others, is
used for our cognition of the object, and thereby many possible
cognitions are collected into one. But we can reduce all acts of the
understanding to judgements, so that understanding may be represented
as the faculty of judging. For it is, according to what has been said
above, a faculty of thought. Now thought is cognition by means of
conceptions. But conceptions, as predicates of possible judgements,
relate to some representation of a yet undetermined object. Thus the
conception of body indicates something—for example, metal—which can be
cognized by means of that conception. It is therefore a conception, for
the reason alone that other representations are contained under it, by
means of which it can relate to objects. It is therefore the predicate
to a possible judgement; for example: “Every metal is a body.” All the
functions of the understanding therefore can be discovered, when we can
completely exhibit the functions of unity in judgements. And that this
may be effected very easily, the following section will show.

Section II. Of the Logical Function of the Understanding in Judgements
§ 5

If we abstract all the content of a judgement, and consider only the
intellectual form thereof, we find that the function of thought in a
judgement can be brought under four heads, of which each contains three
momenta. These may be conveniently represented in the following table:

                                    1
                         _Quantity of judgements_
                                Universal
                                Particular
                                Singular

                      2                           3
                    _Quality                   Relation_
                  Affirmative                Categorical
                  Negative                   Hypothetical
                  Infinite                   Disjunctive

                                    4
                                 _Modality_
                               Problematical
                               Assertorical
                               Apodeictical

As this division appears to differ in some, though not essential
points, from the usual technique of logicians, the following
observations, for the prevention of otherwise possible
misunderstanding, will not be without their use.

1. Logicians say, with justice, that in the use of judgements in
syllogisms, singular judgements may be treated like universal ones.
For, precisely because a singular judgement has no extent at all, its
predicate cannot refer to a part of that which is contained in the
conception of the subject and be excluded from the rest. The predicate
is valid for the whole conception just as if it were a general
conception, and had extent, to the whole of which the predicate
applied. On the other hand, let us compare a singular with a general
judgement, merely as a cognition, in regard to quantity. The singular
judgement relates to the general one, as unity to infinity, and is
therefore in itself essentially different. Thus, if we estimate a
singular judgement (_judicium singulare_) not merely according to its
intrinsic validity as a judgement, but also as a cognition generally,
according to its quantity in comparison with that of other cognitions,
it is then entirely different from a general judgement (_judicium
commune_), and in a complete table of the momenta of thought deserves a
separate place—though, indeed, this would not be necessary in a logic
limited merely to the consideration of the use of judgements in
reference to each other.

2. In like manner, in transcendental logic, infinite must be
distinguished from affirmative judgements, although in general logic
they are rightly enough classed under affirmative. General logic
abstracts all content of the predicate (though it be negative), and
only considers whether the said predicate be affirmed or denied of the
subject. But transcendental logic considers also the worth or content
of this logical affirmation—an affirmation by means of a merely
negative predicate, and inquires how much the sum total of our
cognition gains by this affirmation. For example, if I say of the soul,
“It is not mortal”—by this negative judgement I should at least ward
off error. Now, by the proposition, “The soul is not mortal,” I have,
in respect of the logical form, really affirmed, inasmuch as I thereby
place the soul in the unlimited sphere of immortal beings. Now, because
of the whole sphere of possible existences, the mortal occupies one
part, and the immortal the other, neither more nor less is affirmed by
the proposition than that the soul is one among the infinite multitude
of things which remain over, when I take away the whole mortal part.
But by this proceeding we accomplish only this much, that the infinite
sphere of all possible existences is in so far limited that the mortal
is excluded from it, and the soul is placed in the remaining part of
the extent of this sphere. But this part remains, notwithstanding this
exception, infinite, and more and more parts may be taken away from the
whole sphere, without in the slightest degree thereby augmenting or
affirmatively determining our conception of the soul. These judgements,
therefore, infinite in respect of their logical extent, are, in respect
of the content of their cognition, merely limitative; and are
consequently entitled to a place in our transcendental table of all the
momenta of thought in judgements, because the function of the
understanding exercised by them may perhaps be of importance in the
field of its pure à priori cognition.

3. All relations of thought in judgements are those (a) of the
predicate to the subject; (b) of the principle to its consequence; (c)
of the divided cognition and all the members of the division to each
other. In the first of these three classes, we consider only two
conceptions; in the second, two judgements; in the third, several
judgements in relation to each other. The hypothetical proposition, “If
perfect justice exists, the obstinately wicked are punished,” contains
properly the relation to each other of two propositions, namely,
“Perfect justice exists,” and “The obstinately wicked are punished.”
Whether these propositions are in themselves true is a question not
here decided. Nothing is cogitated by means of this judgement except a
certain consequence. Finally, the disjunctive judgement contains a
relation of two or more propositions to each other—a relation not of
consequence, but of logical opposition, in so far as the sphere of the
one proposition excludes that of the other. But it contains at the same
time a relation of community, in so far as all the propositions taken
together fill up the sphere of the cognition. The disjunctive judgement
contains, therefore, the relation of the parts of the whole sphere of a
cognition, since the sphere of each part is a complemental part of the
sphere of the other, each contributing to form the sum total of the
divided cognition. Take, for example, the proposition, “The world
exists either through blind chance, or through internal necessity, or
through an external cause.” Each of these propositions embraces a part
of the sphere of our possible cognition as to the existence of a world;
all of them taken together, the whole sphere. To take the cognition out
of one of these spheres, is equivalent to placing it in one of the
others; and, on the other hand, to place it in one sphere is equivalent
to taking it out of the rest. There is, therefore, in a disjunctive
judgement a certain community of cognitions, which consists in this,
that they mutually exclude each other, yet thereby determine, as a
whole, the true cognition, inasmuch as, taken together, they make up
the complete content of a particular given cognition. And this is all
that I find necessary, for the sake of what follows, to remark in this
place.

4. The modality of judgements is a quite peculiar function, with this
distinguishing characteristic, that it contributes nothing to the
content of a judgement (for besides quantity, quality, and relation,
there is nothing more that constitutes the content of a judgement), but
concerns itself only with the value of the copula in relation to
thought in general. Problematical judgements are those in which the
affirmation or negation is accepted as merely possible (ad libitum). In
the assertorical, we regard the proposition as real (true); in the
apodeictical, we look on it as necessary.[13] Thus the two judgements
(antecedens et consequens), the relation of which constitutes a
hypothetical judgement, likewise those (the members of the division) in
whose reciprocity the disjunctive consists, are only problematical. In
the example above given the proposition, “There exists perfect
justice,” is not stated assertorically, but as an ad libitum judgement,
which someone may choose to adopt, and the consequence alone is
assertorical. Hence such judgements may be obviously false, and yet,
taken problematically, be conditions of our cognition of the truth.
Thus the proposition, “The world exists only by blind chance,” is in
the disjunctive judgement of problematical import only: that is to say,
one may accept it for the moment, and it helps us (like the indication
of the wrong road among all the roads that one can take) to find out
the true proposition. The problematical proposition is, therefore, that
which expresses only logical possibility (which is not objective); that
is, it expresses a free choice to admit the validity of such a
proposition—a merely arbitrary reception of it into the understanding.
The assertorical speaks of logical reality or truth; as, for example,
in a hypothetical syllogism, the antecedens presents itself in a
problematical form in the major, in an assertorical form in the minor,
and it shows that the proposition is in harmony with the laws of the
understanding. The apodeictical proposition cogitates the assertorical
as determined by these very laws of the understanding, consequently as
affirming à priori, and in this manner it expresses logical necessity.
Now because all is here gradually incorporated with the
understanding—inasmuch as in the first place we judge problematically;
then accept assertorically our judgement as true; lastly, affirm it as
inseparably united with the understanding, that is, as necessary and
apodeictical—we may safely reckon these three functions of modality as
so many momenta of thought.

 [13] Just as if thought were in the first instance a function of the
 understanding; in the second, of judgement; in the third, of reason. A
 remark which will be explained in the sequel.

Section III. Of the Pure Conceptions of the Understanding, or
Categories § 6

General logic, as has been repeatedly said, makes abstraction of all
content of cognition, and expects to receive representations from some
other quarter, in order, by means of analysis, to convert them into
conceptions. On the contrary, transcendental logic has lying before it
the manifold content of à priori sensibility, which transcendental
æsthetic presents to it in order to give matter to the pure conceptions
of the understanding, without which transcendental logic would have no
content, and be therefore utterly void. Now space and time contain an
infinite diversity of determinations of pure à priori intuition, but
are nevertheless the condition of the mind’s receptivity, under which
alone it can obtain representations of objects, and which,
consequently, must always affect the conception of these objects. But
the spontaneity of thought requires that this diversity be examined
after a certain manner, received into the mind, and connected, in order
afterwards to form a cognition out of it. This Process I call
synthesis.

By the word synthesis, in its most general signification, I understand
the process of joining different representations to each other and of
comprehending their diversity in one cognition. This synthesis is pure
when the diversity is not given empirically but à priori (as that in
space and time). Our representations must be given previously to any
analysis of them; and no conceptions can arise, quoad their content,
analytically. But the synthesis of a diversity (be it given à priori or
empirically) is the first requisite for the production of a cognition,
which in its beginning, indeed, may be crude and confused, and
therefore in need of analysis—still, synthesis is that by which alone
the elements of our cognitions are collected and united into a certain
content, consequently it is the first thing on which we must fix our
attention, if we wish to investigate the origin of our knowledge.

Synthesis, generally speaking, is, as we shall afterwards see, the mere
operation of the imagination—a blind but indispensable function of the
soul, without which we should have no cognition whatever, but of the
working of which we are seldom even conscious. But to reduce this
synthesis to conceptions is a function of the understanding, by means
of which we attain to cognition, in the proper meaning of the term.

Pure synthesis, represented generally, gives us the pure conception of
the understanding. But by this pure synthesis, I mean that which rests
upon a basis of à priori synthetical unity. Thus, our numeration (and
this is more observable in large numbers) is a synthesis according to
conceptions, because it takes place according to a common basis of
unity (for example, the decade). By means of this conception,
therefore, the unity in the synthesis of the manifold becomes
necessary.

By means of analysis different representations are brought under one
conception—an operation of which general logic treats. On the other
hand, the duty of transcendental logic is to reduce to conceptions, not
representations, but the pure synthesis of representations. The first
thing which must be given to us for the sake of the à priori cognition
of all objects, is the diversity of the pure intuition; the synthesis
of this diversity by means of the imagination is the second; but this
gives, as yet, no cognition. The conceptions which give unity to this
pure synthesis, and which consist solely in the representation of this
necessary synthetical unity, furnish the third requisite for the
cognition of an object, and these conceptions are given by the
understanding.

The same function which gives unity to the different representation in
a judgement, gives also unity to the mere synthesis of different
representations in an intuition; and this unity we call the pure
conception of the understanding. Thus, the same understanding, and by
the same operations, whereby in conceptions, by means of analytical
unity, it produced the logical form of a judgement, introduces, by
means of the synthetical unity of the manifold in intuition, a
transcendental content into its representations, on which account they
are called pure conceptions of the understanding, and they apply à
priori to objects, a result not within the power of general logic.

In this manner, there arise exactly so many pure conceptions of the
understanding, applying à priori to objects of intuition in general, as
there are logical functions in all possible judgements. For there is no
other function or faculty existing in the understanding besides those
enumerated in that table. These conceptions we shall, with Aristotle,
call categories, our purpose being originally identical with his,
notwithstanding the great difference in the execution.

                     TABLE OF THE CATEGORIES

                    1                         2

              _Of Quantity                Of Quality_
              Unity                      Reality
              Plurality                  Negation
              Totality                   Limitation

                           3
                      _Of Relation_
   Of Inherence and Subsistence (substantia et accidens)
   Of Causality and Dependence (cause and effect)
   Of Community (reciprocity between the agent and patient)

                           4
                     _Of Modality_
              Possibility&mdash;Impossibility
              Existence&mdash;Non-existence
              Necessity&mdash;Contingence

This, then, is a catalogue of all the originally pure conceptions of
the synthesis which the understanding contains à priori, and these
conceptions alone entitle it to be called a pure understanding;
inasmuch as only by them it can render the manifold of intuition
conceivable, in other words, think an object of intuition. This
division is made systematically from a common principle, namely the
faculty of judgement (which is just the same as the power of thought),
and has not arisen rhapsodically from a search at haphazard after pure
conceptions, respecting the full number of which we never could be
certain, inasmuch as we employ induction alone in our search, without
considering that in this way we can never understand wherefore
precisely these conceptions, and none others, abide in the pure
understanding. It was a design worthy of an acute thinker like
Aristotle, to search for these fundamental conceptions. Destitute,
however, of any guiding principle, he picked them up just as they
occurred to him, and at first hunted out ten, which he called
categories (predicaments). Afterwards be believed that he had
discovered five others, which were added under the name of post
predicaments. But his catalogue still remained defective. Besides,
there are to be found among them some of the modes of pure sensibility
(quando, ubi, situs, also prius, simul), and likewise an empirical
conception (motus)—which can by no means belong to this genealogical
register of the pure understanding. Moreover, there are deduced
conceptions (actio, passio) enumerated among the original conceptions,
and, of the latter, some are entirely wanting.

With regard to these, it is to be remarked, that the categories, as the
true primitive conceptions of the pure understanding, have also their
pure deduced conceptions, which, in a complete system of transcendental
philosophy, must by no means be passed over; though in a merely
critical essay we must be contented with the simple mention of the
fact.

Let it be allowed me to call these pure, but deduced conceptions of the
understanding, the predicables of the pure understanding, in
contradistinction to predicaments. If we are in possession of the
original and primitive, the deduced and subsidiary conceptions can
easily be added, and the genealogical tree of the understanding
completely delineated. As my present aim is not to set forth a complete
system, but merely the principles of one, I reserve this task for
another time. It may be easily executed by any one who will refer to
the ontological manuals, and subordinate to the category of causality,
for example, the predicables of force, action, passion; to that of
community, those of presence and resistance; to the categories of
modality, those of origination, extinction, change; and so with the
rest. The categories combined with the modes of pure sensibility, or
with one another, afford a great number of deduced à priori
conceptions; a complete enumeration of which would be a useful and not
unpleasant, but in this place a perfectly dispensable, occupation.

I purposely omit the definitions of the categories in this treatise. I
shall analyse these conceptions only so far as is necessary for the
doctrine of method, which is to form a part of this critique. In a
system of pure reason, definitions of them would be with justice
demanded of me, but to give them here would only bide from our view the
main aim of our investigation, at the same time raising doubts and
objections, the consideration of which, without injustice to our main
purpose, may be very well postponed till another opportunity.
Meanwhile, it ought to be sufficiently clear, from the little we have
already said on this subject, that the formation of a complete
vocabulary of pure conceptions, accompanied by all the requisite
explanations, is not only a possible, but an easy undertaking. The
compartments already exist; it is only necessary to fill them up; and a
systematic topic like the present, indicates with perfect precision the
proper place to which each conception belongs, while it readily points
out any that have not yet been filled up.

§ 7

Our table of the categories suggests considerations of some importance,
which may perhaps have significant results in regard to the scientific
form of all rational cognitions. For, that this table is useful in the
theoretical part of philosophy, nay, indispensable for the sketching of
the complete plan of a science, so far as that science rests upon
conceptions à priori, and for dividing it mathematically, according to
fixed principles, is most manifest from the fact that it contains all
the elementary conceptions of the understanding, nay, even the form of
a system of these in the understanding itself, and consequently
indicates all the momenta, and also the internal arrangement of a
projected speculative science, as I have elsewhere shown.[14] Here
follow some of these observations.

 [14] In the “Metaphysical Principles of Natural Science.”

I. This table, which contains four classes of conceptions of the
understanding, may, in the first instance, be divided into two classes,
the first of which relates to objects of intuition—pure as well as
empirical; the second, to the existence of these objects, either in
relation to one another, or to the understanding.

The former of these classes of categories I would entitle the
mathematical, and the latter the dynamical categories. The former, as
we see, has no correlates; these are only to be found in the second
class. This difference must have a ground in the nature of the human
understanding.

II. The number of the categories in each class is always the same,
namely, three—a fact which also demands some consideration, because in
all other cases division à priori through conceptions is necessarily
dichotomy. It is to be added, that the third category in each triad
always arises from the combination of the second with the first.

Thus totality is nothing else but plurality contemplated as unity;
limitation is merely reality conjoined with negation; community is the
causality of a substance, reciprocally determining, and determined by
other substances; and finally, necessity is nothing but existence,
which is given through the possibility itself. Let it not be supposed,
however, that the third category is merely a deduced, and not a
primitive conception of the pure understanding. For the conjunction of
the first and second, in order to produce the third conception,
requires a particular function of the understanding, which is by no
means identical with those which are exercised in the first and second.
Thus, the conception of a number (which belongs to the category of
totality) is not always possible, where the conceptions of multitude
and unity exist (for example, in the representation of the infinite).
Or, if I conjoin the conception of a cause with that of a substance, it
does not follow that the conception of influence, that is, how one
substance can be the cause of something in another substance, will be
understood from that. Thus it is evident that a particular act of the
understanding is here necessary; and so in the other instances.

III. With respect to one category, namely, that of community, which is
found in the third class, it is not so easy as with the others to
detect its accordance with the form of the disjunctive judgement which
corresponds to it in the table of the logical functions.

In order to assure ourselves of this accordance, we must observe that
in every disjunctive judgement, the sphere of the judgement (that is,
the complex of all that is contained in it) is represented as a whole
divided into parts; and, since one part cannot be contained in the
other, they are cogitated as co-ordinated with, not subordinated to
each other, so that they do not determine each other unilaterally, as
in a linear series, but reciprocally, as in an aggregate—(if one member
of the division is posited, all the rest are excluded; and conversely).

Now a like connection is cogitated in a whole of things; for one thing
is not subordinated, as effect, to another as cause of its existence,
but, on the contrary, is co-ordinated contemporaneously and
reciprocally, as a cause in relation to the determination of the others
(for example, in a body—the parts of which mutually attract and repel
each other). And this is an entirely different kind of connection from
that which we find in the mere relation of the cause to the effect (the
principle to the consequence), for in such a connection the consequence
does not in its turn determine the principle, and therefore does not
constitute, with the latter, a whole—just as the Creator does not with
the world make up a whole. The process of understanding by which it
represents to itself the sphere of a divided conception, is employed
also when we think of a thing as divisible; and in the same manner as
the members of the division in the former exclude one another, and yet
are connected in one sphere, so the understanding represents to itself
the parts of the latter, as having—each of them—an existence (as
substances), independently of the others, and yet as united in one
whole.

§ 8

In the transcendental philosophy of the ancients there exists one more
leading division, which contains pure conceptions of the understanding,
and which, although not numbered among the categories, ought, according
to them, as conceptions à priori, to be valid of objects. But in this
case they would augment the number of the categories; which cannot be.
These are set forth in the proposition, so renowned among the
schoolmen—‘_Quodlibet ens est UNUM, VERUM, BONUM_.’ Now, though the
inferences from this principle were mere tautological propositions, and
though it is allowed only by courtesy to retain a place in modern
metaphysics, yet a thought which maintained itself for such a length of
time, however empty it seems to be, deserves an investigation of its
origin, and justifies the conjecture that it must be grounded in some
law of the understanding, which, as is often the case, has only been
erroneously interpreted. These pretended transcendental predicates are,
in fact, nothing but logical requisites and criteria of all cognition
of objects, and they employ, as the basis for this cognition, the
categories of quantity, namely, unity, plurality, and totality. But
these, which must be taken as material conditions, that is, as
belonging to the possibility of things themselves, they employed merely
in a formal signification, as belonging to the logical requisites of
all cognition, and yet most unguardedly changed these criteria of
thought into properties of objects, as things in themselves. Now, in
every cognition of an object, there is unity of conception, which may
be called qualitative unity, so far as by this term we understand only
the unity in our connection of the manifold; for example, unity of the
theme in a play, an oration, or a story. Secondly, there is truth in
respect of the deductions from it. The more true deductions we have
from a given conception, the more criteria of its objective reality.
This we might call the qualitative plurality of characteristic marks,
which belong to a conception as to a common foundation, but are not
cogitated as a quantity in it. Thirdly, there is perfection—which
consists in this, that the plurality falls back upon the unity of the
conception, and accords completely with that conception and with no
other. This we may denominate qualitative completeness. Hence it is
evident that these logical criteria of the possibility of cognition are
merely the three categories of quantity modified and transformed to
suit an unauthorized manner of applying them. That is to say, the three
categories, in which the unity in the production of the quantum must be
homogeneous throughout, are transformed solely with a view to the
connection of heterogeneous parts of cognition in one act of
consciousness, by means of the quality of the cognition, which is the
principle of that connection. Thus the criterion of the possibility of
a conception (not of its object) is the definition of it, in which the
unity of the conception, the truth of all that may be immediately
deduced from it, and finally, the completeness of what has been thus
deduced, constitute the requisites for the reproduction of the whole
conception. Thus also, the criterion or test of an hypothesis is the
intelligibility of the received principle of explanation, or its unity
(without help from any subsidiary hypothesis)—the truth of our
deductions from it (consistency with each other and with
experience)—and lastly, the completeness of the principle of the
explanation of these deductions, which refer to neither more nor less
than what was admitted in the hypothesis, restoring analytically and à
posteriori, what was cogitated synthetically and à priori. By the
conceptions, therefore, of unity, truth, and perfection, we have made
no addition to the transcendental table of the categories, which is
complete without them. We have, on the contrary, merely employed the
three categories of quantity, setting aside their application to
objects of experience, as general logical laws of the consistency of
cognition with itself.

Chapter II. Of the Deduction of the Pure Conceptions of the
Understanding

Section I. Of the Principles of a Transcendental Deduction in general §
9

Teachers of jurisprudence, when speaking of rights and claims,
distinguish in a cause the question of right (quid juris) from the
question of fact (quid facti), and while they demand proof of both,
they give to the proof of the former, which goes to establish right or
claim in law, the name of deduction. Now we make use of a great number
of empirical conceptions, without opposition from any one; and consider
ourselves, even without any attempt at deduction, justified in
attaching to them a sense, and a supposititious signification, because
we have always experience at hand to demonstrate their objective
reality. There exist also, however, usurped conceptions, such as
fortune, fate, which circulate with almost universal indulgence, and
yet are occasionally challenged by the question, “quid juris?” In such
cases, we have great difficulty in discovering any deduction for these
terms, inasmuch as we cannot produce any manifest ground of right,
either from experience or from reason, on which the claim to employ
them can be founded.

Among the many conceptions, which make up the very variegated web of
human cognition, some are destined for pure use à priori, independent
of all experience; and their title to be so employed always requires a
deduction, inasmuch as, to justify such use of them, proofs from
experience are not sufficient; but it is necessary to know how these
conceptions can apply to objects without being derived from experience.
I term, therefore, an examination of the manner in which conceptions
can apply à priori to objects, the transcendental deduction of
conceptions, and I distinguish it from the empirical deduction, which
indicates the mode in which conception is obtained through experience
and reflection thereon; consequently, does not concern itself with the
right, but only with the fact of our obtaining conceptions in such and
such a manner. We have already seen that we are in possession of two
perfectly different kinds of conceptions, which nevertheless agree with
each other in this, that they both apply to objects completely à
priori. These are the conceptions of space and time as forms of
sensibility, and the categories as pure conceptions of the
understanding. To attempt an empirical deduction of either of these
classes would be labour in vain, because the distinguishing
characteristic of their nature consists in this, that they apply to
their objects, without having borrowed anything from experience towards
the representation of them. Consequently, if a deduction of these
conceptions is necessary, it must always be transcendental.

Meanwhile, with respect to these conceptions, as with respect to all
our cognition, we certainly may discover in experience, if not the
principle of their possibility, yet the occasioning causes of their
production. It will be found that the impressions of sense give the
first occasion for bringing into action the whole faculty of cognition,
and for the production of experience, which contains two very
dissimilar elements, namely, a matter for cognition, given by the
senses, and a certain form for the arrangement of this matter, arising
out of the inner fountain of pure intuition and thought; and these, on
occasion given by sensuous impressions, are called into exercise and
produce conceptions. Such an investigation into the first efforts of
our faculty of cognition to mount from particular perceptions to
general conceptions is undoubtedly of great utility; and we have to
thank the celebrated Locke for having first opened the way for this
inquiry. But a deduction of the pure à priori conceptions of course
never can be made in this way, seeing that, in regard to their future
employment, which must be entirely independent of experience, they must
have a far different certificate of birth to show from that of a
descent from experience. This attempted physiological derivation, which
cannot properly be called deduction, because it relates merely to a
quaestio facti, I shall entitle an explanation of the possession of a
pure cognition. It is therefore manifest that there can only be a
transcendental deduction of these conceptions and by no means an
empirical one; also, that all attempts at an empirical deduction, in
regard to pure à priori conceptions, are vain, and can only be made by
one who does not understand the altogether peculiar nature of these
cognitions.

But although it is admitted that the only possible deduction of pure à
priori cognition is a transcendental deduction, it is not, for that
reason, perfectly manifest that such a deduction is absolutely
necessary. We have already traced to their sources the conceptions of
space and time, by means of a transcendental deduction, and we have
explained and determined their objective validity à priori. Geometry,
nevertheless, advances steadily and securely in the province of pure à
priori cognitions, without needing to ask from philosophy any
certificate as to the pure and legitimate origin of its fundamental
conception of space. But the use of the conception in this science
extends only to the external world of sense, the pure form of the
intuition of which is space; and in this world, therefore, all
geometrical cognition, because it is founded upon à priori intuition,
possesses immediate evidence, and the objects of this cognition are
given à priori (as regards their form) in intuition by and through the
cognition itself. With the pure conceptions of understanding, on the
contrary, commences the absolute necessity of seeking a transcendental
deduction, not only of these conceptions themselves, but likewise of
space, because, inasmuch as they make affirmations concerning objects
not by means of the predicates of intuition and sensibility, but of
pure thought à priori, they apply to objects without any of the
conditions of sensibility. Besides, not being founded on experience,
they are not presented with any object in à priori intuition upon
which, antecedently to experience, they might base their synthesis.
Hence results, not only doubt as to the objective validity and proper
limits of their use, but that even our conception of space is rendered
equivocal; inasmuch as we are very ready with the aid of the
categories, to carry the use of this conception beyond the conditions
of sensuous intuition—and, for this reason, we have already found a
transcendental deduction of it needful. The reader, then, must be quite
convinced of the absolute necessity of a transcendental deduction,
before taking a single step in the field of pure reason; because
otherwise he goes to work blindly, and after he has wondered about in
all directions, returns to the state of utter ignorance from which he
started. He ought, moreover, clearly to recognize beforehand the
unavoidable difficulties in his undertaking, so that he may not
afterwards complain of the obscurity in which the subject itself is
deeply involved, or become too soon impatient of the obstacles in his
path; because we have a choice of only two things—either at once to
give up all pretensions to knowledge beyond the limits of possible
experience, or to bring this critical investigation to completion.

We have been able, with very little trouble, to make it comprehensible
how the conceptions of space and time, although à priori cognitions,
must necessarily apply to external objects, and render a synthetical
cognition of these possible, independently of all experience. For
inasmuch as only by means of such pure form of sensibility an object
can appear to us, that is, be an object of empirical intuition, space
and time are pure intuitions, which contain à priori the condition of
the possibility of objects as phenomena, and an à priori synthesis in
these intuitions possesses objective validity.

On the other hand, the categories of the understanding do not represent
the conditions under which objects are given to us in intuition;
objects can consequently appear to us without necessarily connecting
themselves with these, and consequently without any necessity binding
on the understanding to contain à priori the conditions of these
objects. Thus we find ourselves involved in a difficulty which did not
present itself in the sphere of sensibility, that is to say, we cannot
discover how the subjective conditions of thought can have objective
validity, in other words, can become conditions of the possibility of
all cognition of objects; for phenomena may certainly be given to us in
intuition without any help from the functions of the understanding. Let
us take, for example, the conception of cause, which indicates a
peculiar kind of synthesis, namely, that with something, A, something
entirely different, B, is connected according to a law. It is not à
priori manifest why phenomena should contain anything of this kind (we
are of course debarred from appealing for proof to experience, for the
objective validity of this conception must be demonstrated à priori),
and it hence remains doubtful à priori, whether such a conception be
not quite void and without any corresponding object among phenomena.
For that objects of sensuous intuition must correspond to the formal
conditions of sensibility existing à priori in the mind is quite
evident, from the fact that without these they could not be objects for
us; but that they must also correspond to the conditions which
understanding requires for the synthetical unity of thought is an
assertion, the grounds for which are not so easily to be discovered.
For phenomena might be so constituted as not to correspond to the
conditions of the unity of thought; and all things might lie in such
confusion that, for example, nothing could be met with in the sphere of
phenomena to suggest a law of synthesis, and so correspond to the
conception of cause and effect; so that this conception would be quite
void, null, and without significance. Phenomena would nevertheless
continue to present objects to our intuition; for mere intuition does
not in any respect stand in need of the functions of thought.

If we thought to free ourselves from the labour of these investigations
by saying: “Experience is constantly offering us examples of the
relation of cause and effect in phenomena, and presents us with
abundant opportunity of abstracting the conception of cause, and so at
the same time of corroborating the objective validity of this
conception”; we should in this case be overlooking the fact, that the
conception of cause cannot arise in this way at all; that, on the
contrary, it must either have an à priori basis in the understanding,
or be rejected as a mere chimera. For this conception demands that
something, A, should be of such a nature that something else, B, should
follow from it necessarily, and according to an absolutely universal
law. We may certainly collect from phenomena a law, according to which
this or that usually happens, but the element of necessity is not to be
found in it. Hence it is evident that to the synthesis of cause and
effect belongs a dignity, which is utterly wanting in any empirical
synthesis; for it is no mere mechanical synthesis, by means of
addition, but a dynamical one; that is to say, the effect is not to be
cogitated as merely annexed to the cause, but as posited by and through
the cause, and resulting from it. The strict universality of this law
never can be a characteristic of empirical laws, which obtain through
induction only a comparative universality, that is, an extended range
of practical application. But the pure conceptions of the understanding
would entirely lose all their peculiar character, if we treated them
merely as the productions of experience.

Transition to the Transcendental Deduction of the Categories § 10

There are only two possible ways in which synthetical representation
and its objects can coincide with and relate necessarily to each other,
and, as it were, meet together. Either the object alone makes the
representation possible, or the representation alone makes the object
possible. In the former case, the relation between them is only
empirical, and an à priori representation is impossible. And this is
the case with phenomena, as regards that in them which is referable to
mere sensation. In the latter case—although representation alone (for
of its causality, by means of the will, we do not here speak) does not
produce the object as to its existence, it must nevertheless be à
priori determinative in regard to the object, if it is only by means of
the representation that we can cognize anything as an object. Now there
are only two conditions of the possibility of a cognition of objects;
firstly, intuition, by means of which the object, though only as
phenomenon, is given; secondly, conception, by means of which the
object which corresponds to this intuition is thought. But it is
evident from what has been said on æsthetic that the first condition,
under which alone objects can be intuited, must in fact exist, as a
formal basis for them, à priori in the mind. With this formal condition
of sensibility, therefore, all phenomena necessarily correspond,
because it is only through it that they can be phenomena at all; that
is, can be empirically intuited and given. Now the question is whether
there do not exist, à priori in the mind, conceptions of understanding
also, as conditions under which alone something, if not intuited, is
yet thought as object. If this question be answered in the affirmative,
it follows that all empirical cognition of objects is necessarily
conformable to such conceptions, since, if they are not presupposed, it
is impossible that anything can be an object of experience. Now all
experience contains, besides the intuition of the senses through which
an object is given, a conception also of an object that is given in
intuition. Accordingly, conceptions of objects in general must lie as à
priori conditions at the foundation of all empirical cognition; and
consequently, the objective validity of the categories, as à priori
conceptions, will rest upon this, that experience (as far as regards
the form of thought) is possible only by their means. For in that case
they apply necessarily and à priori to objects of experience, because
only through them can an object of experience be thought.

The whole aim of the transcendental deduction of all à priori
conceptions is to show that these conceptions are à priori conditions
of the possibility of all experience. Conceptions which afford us the
objective foundation of the possibility of experience are for that very
reason necessary. But the analysis of the experiences in which they are
met with is not deduction, but only an illustration of them, because
from experience they could never derive the attribute of necessity.
Without their original applicability and relation to all possible
experience, in which all objects of cognition present themselves, the
relation of the categories to objects, of whatever nature, would be
quite incomprehensible.

The celebrated Locke, for want of due reflection on these points, and
because he met with pure conceptions of the understanding in
experience, sought also to deduce them from experience, and yet
proceeded so inconsequently as to attempt, with their aid, to arrive it
cognitions which lie far beyond the limits of all experience. David
Hume perceived that, to render this possible, it was necessary that the
conceptions should have an à priori origin. But as he could not explain
how it was possible that conceptions which are not connected with each
other in the understanding must nevertheless be thought as necessarily
connected in the object—and it never occurred to him that the
understanding itself might, perhaps, by means of these conceptions, be
the author of the experience in which its objects were presented to
it—he was forced to drive these conceptions from experience, that is,
from a subjective necessity arising from repeated association of
experiences erroneously considered to be objective—in one word, from
habit. But he proceeded with perfect consequence and declared it to be
impossible, with such conceptions and the principles arising from them,
to overstep the limits of experience. The empirical derivation,
however, which both of these philosophers attributed to these
conceptions, cannot possibly be reconciled with the fact that we do
possess scientific à priori cognitions, namely, those of pure
mathematics and general physics.

The former of these two celebrated men opened a wide door to
extravagance—(for if reason has once undoubted right on its side, it
will not allow itself to be confined to set limits, by vague
recommendations of moderation); the latter gave himself up entirely to
scepticism—a natural consequence, after having discovered, as he
thought, that the faculty of cognition was not trustworthy. We now
intend to make a trial whether it be not possible safely to conduct
reason between these two rocks, to assign her determinate limits, and
yet leave open for her the entire sphere of her legitimate activity.

I shall merely premise an explanation of what the categories are. They
are conceptions of an object in general, by means of which its
intuition is contemplated as determined in relation to one of the
logical functions of judgement. The following will make this plain. The
function of the categorical judgement is that of the relation of
subject to predicate; for example, in the proposition: “All bodies are
divisible.” But in regard to the merely logical use of the
understanding, it still remains undetermined to which Of these two
conceptions belongs the function Of subject and to which that of
predicate. For we could also say: “Some divisible is a body.” But the
category of substance, when the conception of a body is brought under
it, determines that; and its empirical intuition in experience must be
contemplated always as subject and never as mere predicate. And so with
all the other categories.

Section II Transcendental Deduction of the pure Conceptions of the
Understanding

Of the Possibility of a Conjunction of the manifold representations
given by Sense § 11.

The manifold content in our representations can be given in an
intuition which is merely sensuous—in other words, is nothing but
susceptibility; and the form of this intuition can exist à priori in
our faculty of representation, without being anything else but the mode
in which the subject is affected. But the conjunction (conjunctio) of a
manifold in intuition never can be given us by the senses; it cannot
therefore be contained in the pure form of sensuous intuition, for it
is a spontaneous act of the faculty of representation. And as we must,
to distinguish it from sensibility, entitle this faculty understanding;
so all conjunction whether conscious or unconscious, be it of the
manifold in intuition, sensuous or non-sensuous, or of several
conceptions—is an act of the understanding. To this act we shall give
the general appellation of synthesis, thereby to indicate, at the same
time, that we cannot represent anything as conjoined in the object
without having previously conjoined it ourselves. Of all mental
notions, that of conjunction is the only one which cannot be given
through objects, but can be originated only by the subject itself,
because it is an act of its purely spontaneous activity. The reader
will easily enough perceive that the possibility of conjunction must be
grounded in the very nature of this act, and that it must be equally
valid for all conjunction, and that analysis, which appears to be its
contrary, must, nevertheless, always presuppose it; for where the
understanding has not previously conjoined, it cannot dissect or
analyse, because only as conjoined by it, must that which is to be
analysed have been given to our faculty of representation.

But the conception of conjunction includes, besides the conception of
the manifold and of the synthesis of it, that of the unity of it also.
Conjunction is the representation of the synthetical unity of the
manifold.[15] This idea of unity, therefore, cannot arise out of that
of conjunction; much rather does that idea, by combining itself with
the representation of the manifold, render the conception of
conjunction possible. This unity, which à priori precedes all
conceptions of conjunction, is not the category of unity (§ 6); for all
the categories are based upon logical functions of judgement, and in
these functions we already have conjunction, and consequently unity of
given conceptions. It is therefore evident that the category of unity
presupposes conjunction. We must therefore look still higher for this
unity (as qualitative, § 8), in that, namely, which contains the ground
of the unity of diverse conceptions in judgements, the ground,
consequently, of the possibility of the existence of the understanding,
even in regard to its logical use.

 [15] Whether the representations are in themselves identical, and
 consequently whether one can be thought analytically by means of and
 through the other, is a question which we need not at present
 consider. Our Consciousness of the one, when we speak of the manifold,
 is always distinguishable from our consciousness of the other; and it
 is only respecting the synthesis of this (possible) consciousness that
 we here treat.

Of the Originally Synthetical Unity of Apperception § 12

The “I think” must accompany all my representations, for otherwise
something would be represented in me which could not be thought; in
other words, the representation would either be impossible, or at least
be, in relation to me, nothing. That representation which can be given
previously to all thought is called intuition. All the diversity or
manifold content of intuition, has, therefore, a necessary relation to
the “I think,” in the subject in which this diversity is found. But
this representation, “I think,” is an act of spontaneity; that is to
say, it cannot be regarded as belonging to mere sensibility. I call it
pure apperception, in order to distinguish it from empirical; or
primitive apperception, because it is self-consciousness which, whilst
it gives birth to the representation “I think,” must necessarily be
capable of accompanying all our representations. It is in all acts of
consciousness one and the same, and unaccompanied by it, no
representation can exist for me. The unity of this apperception I call
the transcendental unity of self-consciousness, in order to indicate
the possibility of à priori cognition arising from it. For the manifold
representations which are given in an intuition would not all of them
be my representations, if they did not all belong to one
self-consciousness, that is, as my representations (even although I am
not conscious of them as such), they must conform to the condition
under which alone they can exist together in a common
self-consciousness, because otherwise they would not all without
exception belong to me. From this primitive conjunction follow many
important results.

For example, this universal identity of the apperception of the
manifold given in intuition contains a synthesis of representations and
is possible only by means of the consciousness of this synthesis. For
the empirical consciousness which accompanies different representations
is in itself fragmentary and disunited, and without relation to the
identity of the subject. This relation, then, does not exist because I
accompany every representation with consciousness, but because I join
one representation to another, and am conscious of the synthesis of
them. Consequently, only because I can connect a variety of given
representations in one consciousness, is it possible that I can
represent to myself the identity of consciousness in these
representations; in other words, the analytical unity of apperception
is possible only under the presupposition of a synthetical unity.[16]
The thought, “These representations given in intuition belong all of
them to me,” is accordingly just the same as, “I unite them in one
self-consciousness, or can at least so unite them”; and although this
thought is not itself the consciousness of the synthesis of
representations, it presupposes the possibility of it; that is to say,
for the reason alone that I can comprehend the variety of my
representations in one consciousness, do I call them my
representations, for otherwise I must have as many-coloured and various
a self as are the representations of which I am conscious. Synthetical
unity of the manifold in intuitions, as given à priori, is therefore
the foundation of the identity of apperception itself, which antecedes
à priori all determinate thought. But the conjunction of
representations into a conception is not to be found in objects
themselves, nor can it be, as it were, borrowed from them and taken up
into the understanding by perception, but it is on the contrary an
operation of the understanding itself, which is nothing more than the
faculty of conjoining à priori and of bringing the variety of given
representations under the unity of apperception. This principle is the
highest in all human cognition.

 [16] All general conceptions—as such—depend, for their existence, on
 the analytical unity of consciousness. For example, when I think of
 red in general, I thereby think to myself a property which (as a
 characteristic mark) can be discovered somewhere, or can be united
 with other representations; consequently, it is only by means of a
 forethought possible synthetical unity that I can think to myself the
 analytical. A representation which is cogitated as common to different
 representations, is regarded as belonging to such as, besides this
 common representation, contain something different; consequently it
 must be previously thought in synthetical unity with other although
 only possible representations, before I can think in it the analytical
 unity of consciousness which makes it a conceptas communis. And thus
 the synthetical unity of apperception is the highest point with which
 we must connect every operation of the understanding, even the whole
 of logic, and after it our transcendental philosophy; indeed, this
 faculty is the understanding itself.

This fundamental principle of the necessary unity of apperception is
indeed an identical, and therefore analytical, proposition; but it
nevertheless explains the necessity for a synthesis of the manifold
given in an intuition, without which the identity of self-consciousness
would be incogitable. For the ego, as a simple representation, presents
us with no manifold content; only in intuition, which is quite
different from the representation ego, can it be given us, and by means
of conjunction it is cogitated in one self-consciousness. An
understanding, in which all the manifold should be given by means of
consciousness itself, would be intuitive; our understanding can only
think and must look for its intuition to sense. I am, therefore,
conscious of my identical self, in relation to all the variety of
representations given to me in an intuition, because I call all of them
my representations. In other words, I am conscious myself of a
necessary à priori synthesis of my representations, which is called the
original synthetical unity of apperception, under which rank all the
representations presented to me, but that only by means of a synthesis.

The Principle of the Synthetical Unity of Apperception is the highest
Principle of all exercise of the Understanding § 13

The supreme principle of the possibility of all intuition in relation
to sensibility was, according to our transcendental æsthetic, that all
the manifold in intuition be subject to the formal conditions of space
and time. The supreme principle of the possibility of it in relation to
the understanding is that all the manifold in it be subject to
conditions of the originally synthetical unity or apperception.[17] To
the former of these two principles are subject all the various
representations of intuition, in so far as they are given to us; to the
latter, in so far as they must be capable of conjunction in one
consciousness; for without this nothing can be thought or cognized,
because the given representations would not have in common the act Of
the apperception “I think” and therefore could not be connected in one
self-consciousness.

 [17] Space and time, and all portions thereof, are intuitions;
 consequently are, with a manifold for their content, single
 representations. (See the Transcendental Æsthetic.) Consequently, they
 are not pure conceptions, by means of which the same consciousness is
 found in a great number of representations; but, on the contrary, they
 are many representations contained in one, the consciousness of which
 is, so to speak, compounded. The unity of consciousness is
 nevertheless synthetical and, therefore, primitive. From this peculiar
 character of consciousness follow many important consequences. (See §
 21.)

Understanding is, to speak generally, the faculty Of cognitions. These
consist in the determined relation of given representation to an
object. But an object is that, in the conception of which the manifold
in a given intuition is united. Now all union of representations
requires unity of consciousness in the synthesis of them. Consequently,
it is the unity of consciousness alone that constitutes the possibility
of representations relating to an object, and therefore of their
objective validity, and of their becoming cognitions, and consequently,
the possibility of the existence of the understanding itself.

The first pure cognition of understanding, then, upon which is founded
all its other exercise, and which is at the same time perfectly
independent of all conditions of mere sensuous intuition, is the
principle of the original synthetical unity of apperception. Thus the
mere form of external sensuous intuition, namely, space, affords us,
per se, no cognition; it merely contributes the manifold in à priori
intuition to a possible cognition. But, in order to cognize something
in space (for example, a line), I must draw it, and thus produce
synthetically a determined conjunction of the given manifold, so that
the unity of this act is at the same time the unity of consciousness
(in the conception of a line), and by this means alone is an object (a
determinate space) cognized. The synthetical unity of consciousness is,
therefore, an objective condition of all cognition, which I do not
merely require in order to cognize an object, but to which every
intuition must necessarily be subject, in order to become an object for
me; because in any other way, and without this synthesis, the manifold
in intuition could not be united in one consciousness.

This proposition is, as already said, itself analytical, although it
constitutes the synthetical unity, the condition of all thought; for it
states nothing more than that all my representations in any given
intuition must be subject to the condition which alone enables me to
connect them, as my representation with the identical self, and so to
unite them synthetically in one apperception, by means of the general
expression, “I think.”

But this principle is not to be regarded as a principle for every
possible understanding, but only for the understanding by means of
whose pure apperception in the thought I am, no manifold content is
given. The understanding or mind which contained the manifold in
intuition, in and through the act itself of its own self-consciousness,
in other words, an understanding by and in the representation of which
the objects of the representation should at the same time exist, would
not require a special act of synthesis of the manifold as the condition
of the unity of its consciousness, an act of which the human
understanding, which thinks only and cannot intuite, has absolute need.
But this principle is the first principle of all the operations of our
understanding, so that we cannot form the least conception of any other
possible understanding, either of one such as should be itself
intuition, or possess a sensuous intuition, but with forms different
from those of space and time.

What Objective Unity of Self-consciousness is § 14

It is by means of the transcendental unity of apperception that all the
manifold, given in an intuition is united into a conception of the
object. On this account it is called objective, and must be
distinguished from the subjective unity of consciousness, which is a
determination of the internal sense, by means of which the said
manifold in intuition is given empirically to be so united. Whether I
can be empirically conscious of the manifold as coexistent or as
successive, depends upon circumstances, or empirical conditions. Hence
the empirical unity of consciousness by means of association of
representations, itself relates to a phenomenal world and is wholly
contingent. On the contrary, the pure form of intuition in time, merely
as an intuition, which contains a given manifold, is subject to the
original unity of consciousness, and that solely by means of the
necessary relation of the manifold in intuition to the “I think,”
consequently by means of the pure synthesis of the understanding, which
lies à priori at the foundation of all empirical synthesis. The
transcendental unity of apperception is alone objectively valid; the
empirical which we do not consider in this essay, and which is merely a
unity deduced from the former under given conditions in concreto,
possesses only subjective validity. One person connects the notion
conveyed in a word with one thing, another with another thing; and the
unity of consciousness in that which is empirical, is, in relation to
that which is given by experience, not necessarily and universally
valid.

The Logical Form of all Judgements consists in the Objective Unity of
Apperception of the Conceptions contained therein § 15

I could never satisfy myself with the definition which logicians give
of a judgement. It is, according to them, the representation of a
relation between two conceptions. I shall not dwell here on the
faultiness of this definition, in that it suits only for categorical
and not for hypothetical or disjunctive judgements, these latter
containing a relation not of conceptions but of judgements themselves—a
blunder from which many evil results have followed.[18] It is more
important for our present purpose to observe, that this definition does
not determine in what the said relation consists.

 [18] The tedious doctrine of the four syllogistic figures concerns
 only categorical syllogisms; and although it is nothing more than
 an artifice by surreptitiously introducing immediate conclusions
 (consequentiae immediatae) among the premises of a pure syllogism,
 to give rise to an appearance of more modes of drawing a conclusion
 than that in the first figure, the artifice would not have had much
 success, had not its authors succeeded in bringing categorical
 judgements into exclusive respect, as those to which all others must
 be referred—a doctrine, however, which, according to § 5, is utterly
 false.

But if I investigate more closely the relation of given cognitions in
every judgement, and distinguish it, as belonging to the understanding,
from the relation which is produced according to laws of the
reproductive imagination (which has only subjective validity), I find
that judgement is nothing but the mode of bringing given cognitions
under the objective unit of apperception. This is plain from our use of
the term of relation is in judgements, in order to distinguish the
objective unity of given representations from the subjective unity. For
this term indicates the relation of these representations to the
original apperception, and also their necessary unity, even although
the judgement is empirical, therefore contingent, as in the judgement:
“All bodies are heavy.” I do not mean by this, that these
representations do necessarily belong to each other in empirical
intuition, but that by means of the necessary unity of appreciation
they belong to each other in the synthesis of intuitions, that is to
say, they belong to each other according to principles of the objective
determination of all our representations, in so far as cognition can
arise from them, these principles being all deduced from the main
principle of the transcendental unity of apperception. In this way
alone can there arise from this relation a judgement, that is, a
relation which has objective validity, and is perfectly distinct from
that relation of the very same representations which has only
subjective validity—a relation, to wit, which is produced according to
laws of association. According to these laws, I could only say: “When I
hold in my hand or carry a body, I feel an impression of weight”; but I
could not say: “It, the body, is heavy”; for this is tantamount to
saying both these representations are conjoined in the object, that is,
without distinction as to the condition of the subject, and do not
merely stand together in my perception, however frequently the
perceptive act may be repeated.

All Sensuous Intuitions are subject to the Categories, as Conditions
under which alone the manifold Content of them can be united in one
Consciousness § 16

The manifold content given in a sensuous intuition comes necessarily
under the original synthetical unity of apperception, because thereby
alone is the unity of intuition possible (§ 13). But that act of the
understanding, by which the manifold content of given representations
(whether intuitions or conceptions) is brought under one apperception,
is the logical function of judgements (§ 15). All the manifold,
therefore, in so far as it is given in one empirical intuition, is
determined in relation to one of the logical functions of judgement, by
means of which it is brought into union in one consciousness. Now the
categories are nothing else than these functions of judgement so far as
the manifold in a given intuition is determined in relation to them (§
9). Consequently, the manifold in a given intuition is necessarily
subject to the categories of the understanding.

Observation § 17

The manifold in an intuition, which I call mine, is represented by
means of the synthesis of the understanding, as belonging to the
necessary unity of self-consciousness, and this takes place by means of
the category.[19] The category indicates accordingly that the empirical
consciousness of a given manifold in an intuition is subject to a pure
self-consciousness à priori, in the same manner as an empirical
intuition is subject to a pure sensuous intuition, which is also à
priori. In the above proposition, then, lies the beginning of a
deduction of the pure conceptions of the understanding. Now, as the
categories have their origin in the understanding alone, independently
of sensibility, I must in my deduction make abstraction of the mode in
which the manifold of an empirical intuition is given, in order to fix
my attention exclusively on the unity which is brought by the
understanding into the intuition by means of the category. In what
follows (§ 22), it will be shown, from the mode in which the empirical
intuition is given in the faculty of sensibility, that the unity which
belongs to it is no other than that which the category (according to §
16) imposes on the manifold in a given intuition, and thus, its à
priori validity in regard to all objects of sense being established,
the purpose of our deduction will be fully attained.

 [19] The proof of this rests on the represented unity of intuition, by
 means of which an object is given, and which always includes in itself
 a synthesis of the manifold to be intuited, and also the relation of
 this latter to unity of apperception.

But there is one thing in the above demonstration of which I could not
make abstraction, namely, that the manifold to be intuited must be
given previously to the synthesis of the understanding, and
independently of it. How this takes place remains here undetermined.
For if I cogitate an understanding which was itself intuitive (as, for
example, a divine understanding which should not represent given
objects, but by whose representation the objects themselves should be
given or produced), the categories would possess no significance in
relation to such a faculty of cognition. They are merely rules for an
understanding, whose whole power consists in thought, that is, in the
act of submitting the synthesis of the manifold which is presented to
it in intuition from a very different quarter, to the unity of
apperception; a faculty, therefore, which cognizes nothing per se, but
only connects and arranges the material of cognition, the intuition,
namely, which must be presented to it by means of the object. But to
show reasons for this peculiar character of our understandings, that it
produces unity of apperception à priori only by means of categories,
and a certain kind and number thereof, is as impossible as to explain
why we are endowed with precisely so many functions of judgement and no
more, or why time and space are the only forms of our intuition.

In Cognition, its Application to Objects of Experience is the only
legitimate use of the Category § 18

To think an object and to cognize an object are by no means the same
thing. In cognition there are two elements: firstly, the conception,
whereby an object is cogitated (the category); and, secondly, the
intuition, whereby the object is given. For supposing that to the
conception a corresponding intuition could not be given, it would still
be a thought as regards its form, but without any object, and no
cognition of anything would be possible by means of it, inasmuch as, so
far as I knew, there existed and could exist nothing to which my
thought could be applied. Now all intuition possible to us is sensuous;
consequently, our thought of an object by means of a pure conception of
the understanding, can become cognition for us only in so far as this
conception is applied to objects of the senses. Sensuous intuition is
either pure intuition (space and time) or empirical intuition—of that
which is immediately represented in space and time by means of
sensation as real. Through the determination of pure intuition we
obtain à priori cognitions of objects, as in mathematics, but only as
regards their form as phenomena; whether there can exist things which
must be intuited in this form is not thereby established. All
mathematical conceptions, therefore, are not per se cognition, except
in so far as we presuppose that there exist things which can only be
represented conformably to the form of our pure sensuous intuition. But
things in space and time are given only in so far as they are
perceptions (representations accompanied with sensation), therefore
only by empirical representation. Consequently the pure conceptions of
the understanding, even when they are applied to intuitions à priori
(as in mathematics), produce cognition only in so far as these (and
therefore the conceptions of the understanding by means of them) can be
applied to empirical intuitions. Consequently the categories do not,
even by means of pure intuition afford us any cognition of things; they
can only do so in so far as they can be applied to empirical intuition.
That is to say, the categories serve only to render empirical cognition
possible. But this is what we call experience. Consequently, in
cognition, their application to objects of experience is the only
legitimate use of the categories.

§ 19

The foregoing proposition is of the utmost importance, for it
determines the limits of the exercise of the pure conceptions of the
understanding in regard to objects, just as transcendental æsthetic
determined the limits of the exercise of the pure form of our sensuous
intuition. Space and time, as conditions of the possibility of the
presentation of objects to us, are valid no further than for objects of
sense, consequently, only for experience. Beyond these limits they
represent to us nothing, for they belong only to sense, and have no
reality apart from it. The pure conceptions of the understanding are
free from this limitation, and extend to objects of intuition in
general, be the intuition like or unlike to ours, provided only it be
sensuous, and not intellectual. But this extension of conceptions
beyond the range of our intuition is of no advantage; for they are then
mere empty conceptions of objects, as to the possibility or
impossibility of the existence of which they furnish us with no means
of discovery. They are mere forms of thought, without objective
reality, because we have no intuition to which the synthetical unity of
apperception, which alone the categories contain, could be applied, for
the purpose of determining an object. Our sensuous and empirical
intuition can alone give them significance and meaning.

If, then, we suppose an object of a non-sensuous intuition to be given
we can in that case represent it by all those predicates which are
implied in the presupposition that nothing appertaining to sensuous
intuition belongs to it; for example, that it is not extended, or in
space; that its duration is not time; that in it no change (the effect
of the determinations in time) is to be met with, and so on. But it is
no proper knowledge if I merely indicate what the intuition of the
object is not, without being able to say what is contained in it, for I
have not shown the possibility of an object to which my pure conception
of understanding could be applicable, because I have not been able to
furnish any intuition corresponding to it, but am only able to say that
our intuition is not valid for it. But the most important point is
this, that to a something of this kind not one category can be found
applicable. Take, for example, the conception of substance, that is,
something that can exist as subject, but never as mere predicate; in
regard to this conception I am quite ignorant whether there can really
be anything to correspond to such a determination of thought, if
empirical intuition did not afford me the occasion for its application.
But of this more in the sequel.

Of the Application of the Categories to Objects of the Senses in
general § 20

The pure conceptions of the understanding apply to objects of intuition
in general, through the understanding alone, whether the intuition be
our own or some other, provided only it be sensuous, but are, for this
very reason, mere forms of thought, by means of which alone no
determined object can be cognized. The synthesis or conjunction of the
manifold in these conceptions relates, we have said, only to the unity
of apperception, and is for this reason the ground of the possibility
of à priori cognition, in so far as this cognition is dependent on the
understanding. This synthesis is, therefore, not merely transcendental,
but also purely intellectual. But because a certain form of sensuous
intuition exists in the mind à priori which rests on the receptivity of
the representative faculty (sensibility), the understanding, as a
spontaneity, is able to determine the internal sense by means of the
diversity of given representations, conformably to the synthetical
unity of apperception, and thus to cogitate the synthetical unity of
the apperception of the manifold of sensuous intuition à priori, as the
condition to which must necessarily be submitted all objects of human
intuition. And in this manner the categories as mere forms of thought
receive objective reality, that is, application to objects which are
given to us in intuition, but that only as phenomena, for it is only of
phenomena that we are capable of à priori intuition.

This synthesis of the manifold of sensuous intuition, which is possible
and necessary à priori, may be called figurative (synthesis speciosa),
in contradistinction to that which is cogitated in the mere category in
regard to the manifold of an intuition in general, and is called
connection or conjunction of the understanding (synthesis
intellectualis). Both are transcendental, not merely because they
themselves precede à priori all experience, but also because they form
the basis for the possibility of other cognition à priori.

But the figurative synthesis, when it has relation only to the
originally synthetical unity of apperception, that is to the
transcendental unity cogitated in the categories, must, to be
distinguished from the purely intellectual conjunction, be entitled the
transcendental synthesis of imagination. Imagination is the faculty of
representing an object even without its presence in intuition. Now, as
all our intuition is sensuous, imagination, by reason of the subjective
condition under which alone it can give a corresponding intuition to
the conceptions of the understanding, belongs to sensibility. But in so
far as the synthesis of the imagination is an act of spontaneity, which
is determinative, and not, like sense, merely determinable, and which
is consequently able to determine sense à priori, according to its
form, conformably to the unity of apperception, in so far is the
imagination a faculty of determining sensibility à priori, and its
synthesis of intuitions according to the categories must be the
transcendental synthesis of the imagination. It is an operation of the
understanding on sensibility, and the first application of the
understanding to objects of possible intuition, and at the same time
the basis for the exercise of the other functions of that faculty. As
figurative, it is distinguished from the merely intellectual synthesis,
which is produced by the understanding alone, without the aid of
imagination. Now, in so far as imagination is spontaneity, I sometimes
call it also the productive imagination, and distinguish it from the
reproductive, the synthesis of which is subject entirely to empirical
laws, those of association, namely, and which, therefore, contributes
nothing to the explanation of the possibility of à priori cognition,
and for this reason belongs not to transcendental philosophy, but to
psychology.

We have now arrived at the proper place for explaining the paradox
which must have struck every one in our exposition of the internal
sense (§ 6), namely—how this sense represents us to our own
consciousness, only as we appear to ourselves, not as we are in
ourselves, because, to wit, we intuite ourselves only as we are
inwardly affected. Now this appears to be contradictory, inasmuch as we
thus stand in a passive relation to ourselves; and therefore in the
systems of psychology, the internal sense is commonly held to be one
with the faculty of apperception, while we, on the contrary, carefully
distinguish them.

That which determines the internal sense is the understanding, and its
original power of conjoining the manifold of intuition, that is, of
bringing this under an apperception (upon which rests the possibility
of the understanding itself). Now, as the human understanding is not in
itself a faculty of intuition, and is unable to exercise such a power,
in order to conjoin, as it were, the manifold of its own intuition, the
synthesis of understanding is, considered per se, nothing but the unity
of action, of which, as such, it is self-conscious, even apart from
sensibility, by which, moreover, it is able to determine our internal
sense in respect of the manifold which may be presented to it according
to the form of sensuous intuition. Thus, under the name of a
transcendental synthesis of imagination, the understanding exercises an
activity upon the passive subject, whose faculty it is; and so we are
right in saying that the internal sense is affected thereby.
Apperception and its synthetical unity are by no means one and the same
with the internal sense. The former, as the source of all our
synthetical conjunction, applies, under the name of the categories, to
the manifold of intuition in general, prior to all sensuous intuition
of objects. The internal sense, on the contrary, contains merely the
form of intuition, but without any synthetical conjunction of the
manifold therein, and consequently does not contain any determined
intuition, which is possible only through consciousness of the
determination of the manifold by the transcendental act of the
imagination (synthetical influence of the understanding on the internal
sense), which I have named figurative synthesis.

This we can indeed always perceive in ourselves. We cannot cogitate a
geometrical line without drawing it in thought, nor a circle without
describing it, nor represent the three dimensions of space without
drawing three lines from the same point perpendicular to one another.
We cannot even cogitate time, unless, in drawing a straight line (which
is to serve as the external figurative representation of time), we fix
our attention on the act of the synthesis of the manifold, whereby we
determine successively the internal sense, and thus attend also to the
succession of this determination. Motion as an act of the subject (not
as a determination of an object),[20] consequently the synthesis of the
manifold in space, if we make abstraction of space and attend merely to
the act by which we determine the internal sense according to its form,
is that which produces the conception of succession. The understanding,
therefore, does by no means find in the internal sense any such
synthesis of the manifold, but produces it, in that it affects this
sense. At the same time, how “I who think” is distinct from the “i”
which intuites itself (other modes of intuition being cogitable as at
least possible), and yet one and the same with this latter as the same
subject; how, therefore, I am able to say: “I, as an intelligence and
thinking subject, cognize myself as an object thought, so far as I am,
moreover, given to myself in intuition—only, like other phenomena, not
as I am in myself, and as considered by the understanding, but merely
as I appear”—is a question that has in it neither more nor less
difficulty than the question—“How can I be an object to myself?” or
this—“How I can be an object of my own intuition and internal
perceptions?” But that such must be the fact, if we admit that space is
merely a pure form of the phenomena of external sense, can be clearly
proved by the consideration that we cannot represent time, which is not
an object of external intuition, in any other way than under the image
of a line, which we draw in thought, a mode of representation without
which we could not cognize the unity of its dimension, and also that we
are necessitated to take our determination of periods of time, or of
points of time, for all our internal perceptions from the changes which
we perceive in outward things. It follows that we must arrange the
determinations of the internal sense, as phenomena in time, exactly in
the same manner as we arrange those of the external senses in space.
And consequently, if we grant, respecting this latter, that by means of
them we know objects only in so far as we are affected externally, we
must also confess, with regard to the internal sense, that by means of
it we intuite ourselves only as we are internally affected by
ourselves; in other words, as regards internal intuition, we cognize
our own subject only as phenomenon, and not as it is in itself.[21]

 [20] Motion of an object in space does not belong to a pure science,
 consequently not to geometry; because, that a thing is movable cannot
 be known à priori, but only from experience. But motion, considered as
 the description of a space, is a pure act of the successive synthesis
 of the manifold in external intuition by means of productive
 imagination, and belongs not only to geometry, but even to
 transcendental philosophy.

 [21] I do not see why so much difficulty should be found in admitting
 that our internal sense is affected by ourselves. Every act of
 attention exemplifies it. In such an act the understanding determines
 the internal sense by the synthetical conjunction which it cogitates,
 conformably to the internal intuition which corresponds to the
 manifold in the synthesis of the understanding. How much the mind is
 usually affected thereby every one will be able to perceive in
 himself.

§ 21

On the other hand, in the transcendental synthesis of the manifold
content of representations, consequently in the synthetical unity of
apperception, I am conscious of myself, not as I appear to myself, nor
as I am in myself, but only that “I am.” This representation is a
thought, not an intuition. Now, as in order to cognize ourselves, in
addition to the act of thinking, which subjects the manifold of every
possible intuition to the unity of apperception, there is necessary a
determinate mode of intuition, whereby this manifold is given; although
my own existence is certainly not mere phenomenon (much less mere
illusion), the determination of my existence[22] Can only take place
conformably to the form of the internal sense, according to the
particular mode in which the manifold which I conjoin is given in
internal intuition, and I have therefore no knowledge of myself as I
am, but merely as I appear to myself. The consciousness of self is thus
very far from a knowledge of self, in which I do not use the
categories, whereby I cogitate an object, by means of the conjunction
of the manifold in one apperception. In the same way as I require, for
the sake of the cognition of an object distinct from myself, not only
the thought of an object in general (in the category), but also an
intuition by which to determine that general conception, in the same
way do I require, in order to the cognition of myself, not only the
consciousness of myself or the thought that I think myself, but in
addition an intuition of the manifold in myself, by which to determine
this thought. It is true that I exist as an intelligence which is
conscious only of its faculty of conjunction or synthesis, but
subjected in relation to the manifold which this intelligence has to
conjoin to a limitative conjunction called the internal sense. My
intelligence (that is, I) can render that conjunction or synthesis
perceptible only according to the relations of time, which are quite
beyond the proper sphere of the conceptions of the understanding and
consequently cognize itself in respect to an intuition (which cannot
possibly be intellectual, nor given by the understanding), only as it
appears to itself, and not as it would cognize itself, if its intuition
were intellectual.

 [22] The “I think” expresses the act of determining my own existence.
 My existence is thus already given by the act of consciousness; but
 the mode in which I must determine my existence, that is, the mode in
 which I must place the manifold belonging to my existence, is not
 thereby given. For this purpose intuition of self is required, and
 this intuition possesses a form given à priori, namely, time, which is
 sensuous, and belongs to our receptivity of the determinable. Now, as
 I do not possess another intuition of self which gives the determining
 in me (of the spontaneity of which I am conscious), prior to the act
 of determination, in the same manner as time gives the determinable,
 it is clear that I am unable to determine my own existence as that of
 a spontaneous being, but I am only able to represent to myself the
 spontaneity of my thought, that is, of my determination, and my
 existence remains ever determinable in a purely sensuous manner, that
 is to say, like the existence of a phenomenon. But it is because of
 this spontaneity that I call myself an intelligence.

Transcendental Deduction of the universally possible employment in
experience of the Pure Conceptions of the Understanding § 22

In the metaphysical deduction, the à priori origin of categories was
proved by their complete accordance with the general logical of
thought; in the transcendental deduction was exhibited the possibility
of the categories as à priori cognitions of objects of an intuition in
general (§ 16 and 17).At present we are about to explain the
possibility of cognizing, à priori, by means of the categories, all
objects which can possibly be presented to our senses, not, indeed,
according to the form of their intuition, but according to the laws of
their conjunction or synthesis, and thus, as it were, of prescribing
laws to nature and even of rendering nature possible. For if the
categories were inadequate to this task, it would not be evident to us
why everything that is presented to our senses must be subject to those
laws which have an à priori origin in the understanding itself.

I premise that by the term synthesis of apprehension I understand the
combination of the manifold in an empirical intuition, whereby
perception, that is, empirical consciousness of the intuition (as
phenomenon), is possible.

We have à priori forms of the external and internal sensuous intuition
in the representations of space and time, and to these must the
synthesis of apprehension of the manifold in a phenomenon be always
comformable, because the synthesis itself can only take place according
to these forms. But space and time are not merely forms of sensuous
intuition, but intuitions themselves (which contain a manifold), and
therefore contain à priori the determination of the unity of this
manifold.[23] (See the Transcendent Æsthetic.) Therefore is unity of
the synthesis of the manifold without or within us, consequently also a
conjunction to which all that is to be represented as determined in
space or time must correspond, given à priori along with (not in) these
intuitions, as the condition of the synthesis of all apprehension of
them. But this synthetical unity can be no other than that of the
conjunction of the manifold of a given intuition in general, in a
primitive act of consciousness, according to the categories, but
applied to our sensuous intuition. Consequently all synthesis, whereby
alone is even perception possible, is subject to the categories. And,
as experience is cognition by means of conjoined perceptions, the
categories are conditions of the possibility of experience and are
therefore valid à priori for all objects of experience.

 [23] Space represented as an object (as geometry really requires it to
 be) contains more than the mere form of the intuition; namely, a
 combination of the manifold given according to the form of sensibility
 into a representation that can be intuited; so that the form of the
 intuition gives us merely the manifold, but the formal intuition gives
 unity of representation. In the æsthetic, I regarded this unity as
 belonging entirely to sensibility, for the purpose of indicating that
 it antecedes all conceptions, although it presupposes a synthesis
 which does not belong to sense, through which alone, however, all our
 conceptions of space and time are possible. For as by means of this
 unity alone (the understanding determining the sensibility) space and
 time are given as intuitions, it follows that the unity of this
 intuition à priori belongs to space and time, and not to the
 conception of the understanding (§ 20).

When, then, for example, I make the empirical intuition of a house by
apprehension of the manifold contained therein into a perception, the
necessary unity of space and of my external sensuous intuition lies at
the foundation of this act, and I, as it were, draw the form of the
house conformably to this synthetical unity of the manifold in space.
But this very synthetical unity remains, even when I abstract the form
of space, and has its seat in the understanding, and is in fact the
category of the synthesis of the homogeneous in an intuition; that is
to say, the category of quantity, to which the aforesaid synthesis of
apprehension, that is, the perception, must be completely
conformable.[24]

 [24] In this manner it is proved, that the synthesis of apprehension,
 which is empirical, must necessarily be conformable to the synthesis
 of apperception, which is intellectual, and contained à priori in the
 category. It is one and the same spontaneity which at one time, under
 the name of imagination, at another under that of understanding,
 produces conjunction in the manifold of intuition.

To take another example, when I perceive the freezing of water, I
apprehend two states (fluidity and solidity), which, as such, stand
toward each other mutually in a relation of time. But in the time,
which I place as an internal intuition, at the foundation of this
phenomenon, I represent to myself synthetical unity of the manifold,
without which the aforesaid relation could not be given in an intuition
as determined (in regard to the succession of time). Now this
synthetical unity, as the à priori condition under which I conjoin the
manifold of an intuition, is, if I make abstraction of the permanent
form of my internal intuition (that is to say, of time), the category
of cause, by means of which, when applied to my sensibility, I
determine everything that occurs according to relations of time.
Consequently apprehension in such an event, and the event itself, as
far as regards the possibility of its perception, stands under the
conception of the relation of cause and effect: and so in all other
cases.

Categories are conceptions which prescribe laws à priori to phenomena,
consequently to nature as the complex of all phenomena (natura
materialiter spectata). And now the question arises—inasmuch as these
categories are not derived from nature, and do not regulate themselves
according to her as their model (for in that case they would be
empirical)—how it is conceivable that nature must regulate herself
according to them, in other words, how the categories can determine à
priori the synthesis of the manifold of nature, and yet not derive
their origin from her. The following is the solution of this enigma.

It is not in the least more difficult to conceive how the laws of the
phenomena of nature must harmonize with the understanding and with its
à priori form—that is, its faculty of conjoining the manifold—than it
is to understand how the phenomena themselves must correspond with the
à priori form of our sensuous intuition. For laws do not exist in the
phenomena any more than the phenomena exist as things in themselves.
Laws do not exist except by relation to the subject in which the
phenomena inhere, in so far as it possesses understanding, just as
phenomena have no existence except by relation to the same existing
subject in so far as it has senses. To things as things in themselves,
conformability to law must necessarily belong independently of an
understanding to cognize them. But phenomena are only representations
of things which are utterly unknown in respect to what they are in
themselves. But as mere representations, they stand under no law of
conjunction except that which the conjoining faculty prescribes. Now
that which conjoins the manifold of sensuous intuition is imagination,
a mental act to which understanding contributes unity of intellectual
synthesis, and sensibility, manifoldness of apprehension. Now as all
possible perception depends on the synthesis of apprehension, and this
empirical synthesis itself on the transcendental, consequently on the
categories, it is evident that all possible perceptions, and therefore
everything that can attain to empirical consciousness, that is, all
phenomena of nature, must, as regards their conjunction, be subject to
the categories. And nature (considered merely as nature in general) is
dependent on them, as the original ground of her necessary
conformability to law (as natura formaliter spectata). But the pure
faculty (of the understanding) of prescribing laws à priori to
phenomena by means of mere categories, is not competent to enounce
other or more laws than those on which a nature in general, as a
conformability to law of phenomena of space and time, depends.
Particular laws, inasmuch as they concern empirically determined
phenomena, cannot be entirely deduced from pure laws, although they all
stand under them. Experience must be superadded in order to know these
particular laws; but in regard to experience in general, and everything
that can be cognized as an object thereof, these à priori laws are our
only rule and guide.

Result of this Deduction of the Conceptions of the Understanding § 23

We cannot think any object except by means of the categories; we cannot
cognize any thought except by means of intuitions corresponding to
these conceptions. Now all our intuitions are sensuous, and our
cognition, in so far as the object of it is given, is empirical. But
empirical cognition is experience; consequently no à priori cognition
is possible for us, except of objects of possible experience.[25]

 [25] Lest my readers should stumble at this assertion, and the
 conclusions that may be too rashly drawn from it, I must remind them
 that the categories in the act of thought are by no means limited by
 the conditions of our sensuous intuition, but have an unbounded sphere
 of action. It is only the cognition of the object of thought, the
 determining of the object, which requires intuition. In the absence of
 intuition, our thought of an object may still have true and useful
 consequences in regard to the exercise of reason by the subject. But
 as this exercise of reason is not always directed on the determination
 of the object, in other words, on cognition thereof, but also on the
 determination of the subject and its volition, I do not intend to
 treat of it in this place.

But this cognition, which is limited to objects of experience, is not
for that reason derived entirely, from, experience, but—and this is
asserted of the pure intuitions and the pure conceptions of the
understanding—there are, unquestionably, elements of cognition, which
exist in the mind à priori. Now there are only two ways in which a
necessary harmony of experience with the conceptions of its objects can
be cogitated. Either experience makes these conceptions possible, or
the conceptions make experience possible. The former of these
statements will not hold good with respect to the categories (nor in
regard to pure sensuous intuition), for they are à priori conceptions,
and therefore independent of experience. The assertion of an empirical
origin would attribute to them a sort of generatio aequivoca.
Consequently, nothing remains but to adopt the second alternative
(which presents us with a system, as it were, of the epigenesis of pure
reason), namely, that on the part of the understanding the categories
do contain the grounds of the possibility of all experience. But with
respect to the questions how they make experience possible, and what
are the principles of the possibility thereof with which they present
us in their application to phenomena, the following section on the
transcendental exercise of the faculty of judgement will inform the
reader.

It is quite possible that someone may propose a species of
preformation-system of pure reason—a middle way between the two—to wit,
that the categories are neither innate and first à priori principles of
cognition, nor derived from experience, but are merely subjective
aptitudes for thought implanted in us contemporaneously with our
existence, which were so ordered and disposed by our Creator, that
their exercise perfectly harmonizes with the laws of nature which
regulate experience. Now, not to mention that with such an hypothesis
it is impossible to say at what point we must stop in the employment of
predetermined aptitudes, the fact that the categories would in this
case entirely lose that character of necessity which is essentially
involved in the very conception of them, is a conclusive objection to
it. The conception of cause, for example, which expresses the necessity
of an effect under a presupposed condition, would be false, if it
rested only upon such an arbitrary subjective necessity of uniting
certain empirical representations according to such a rule of relation.
I could not then say—“The effect is connected with its cause in the
object (that is, necessarily),” but only, “I am so constituted that I
can think this representation as so connected, and not otherwise.” Now
this is just what the sceptic wants. For in this case, all our
knowledge, depending on the supposed objective validity of our
judgement, is nothing but mere illusion; nor would there be wanting
people who would deny any such subjective necessity in respect to
themselves, though they must feel it. At all events, we could not
dispute with any one on that which merely depends on the manner in
which his subject is organized.

Short view of the above Deduction.

The foregoing deduction is an exposition of the pure conceptions of the
understanding (and with them of all theoretical à priori cognition), as
principles of the possibility of experience, but of experience as the
determination of all phenomena in space and time in general—of
experience, finally, from the principle of the original synthetical
unity of apperception, as the form of the understanding in relation to
time and space as original forms of sensibility.

I consider the division by paragraphs to be necessary only up to this
point, because we had to treat of the elementary conceptions. As we now
proceed to the exposition of the employment of these, I shall not
designate the chapters in this manner any further.

BOOK II. Analytic of Principles

General logic is constructed upon a plan which coincides exactly with
the division of the higher faculties of cognition. These are,
understanding, judgement, and reason. This science, accordingly, treats
in its analytic of conceptions, judgements, and conclusions in exact
correspondence with the functions and order of those mental powers
which we include generally under the generic denomination of
understanding.

As this merely formal logic makes abstraction of all content of
cognition, whether pure or empirical, and occupies itself with the mere
form of thought (discursive cognition), it must contain in its analytic
a canon for reason. For the form of reason has its law, which, without
taking into consideration the particular nature of the cognition about
which it is employed, can be discovered à priori, by the simple
analysis of the action of reason into its momenta.

Transcendental logic, limited as it is to a determinate content, that
of pure à priori cognitions, to wit, cannot imitate general logic in
this division. For it is evident that the transcendental employment of
reason is not objectively valid, and therefore does not belong to the
logic of truth (that is, to analytic), but as a logic of illusion,
occupies a particular department in the scholastic system under the
name of transcendental dialectic.

Understanding and judgement accordingly possess in transcendental logic
a canon of objectively valid, and therefore true exercise, and are
comprehended in the analytical department of that logic. But reason, in
her endeavours to arrive by à priori means at some true statement
concerning objects and to extend cognition beyond the bounds of
possible experience, is altogether dialectic, and her illusory
assertions cannot be constructed into a canon such as an analytic ought
to contain.

Accordingly, the analytic of principles will be merely a canon for the
faculty of judgement, for the instruction of this faculty in its
application to phenomena of the pure conceptions of the understanding,
which contain the necessary condition for the establishment of à priori
laws. On this account, although the subject of the following chapters
is the especial principles of understanding, I shall make use of the
term Doctrine of the faculty of judgement, in order to define more
particularly my present purpose.

INTRODUCTION. Of the Transcendental Faculty of judgement in General

If understanding in general be defined as the faculty of laws or rules,
the faculty of judgement may be termed the faculty of subsumption under
these rules; that is, of distinguishing whether this or that does or
does not stand under a given rule (casus datae legis). General logic
contains no directions or precepts for the faculty of judgement, nor
can it contain any such. For as it makes abstraction of all content of
cognition, no duty is left for it, except that of exposing analytically
the mere form of cognition in conceptions, judgements, and conclusions,
and of thereby establishing formal rules for all exercise of the
understanding. Now if this logic wished to give some general direction
how we should subsume under these rules, that is, how we should
distinguish whether this or that did or did not stand under them, this
again could not be done otherwise than by means of a rule. But this
rule, precisely because it is a rule, requires for itself direction
from the faculty of judgement. Thus, it is evident that the
understanding is capable of being instructed by rules, but that the
judgement is a peculiar talent, which does not, and cannot require
tuition, but only exercise. This faculty is therefore the specific
quality of the so-called mother wit, the want of which no scholastic
discipline can compensate.

For although education may furnish, and, as it were, engraft upon a
limited understanding rules borrowed from other minds, yet the power of
employing these rules correctly must belong to the pupil himself; and
no rule which we can prescribe to him with this purpose is, in the
absence or deficiency of this gift of nature, secure from misuse.[26] A
physician therefore, a judge or a statesman, may have in his head many
admirable pathological, juridical, or political rules, in a degree that
may enable him to be a profound teacher in his particular science, and
yet in the application of these rules he may very possibly
blunder—either because he is wanting in natural judgement (though not
in understanding) and, whilst he can comprehend the general in
abstracto, cannot distinguish whether a particular case in concreto
ought to rank under the former; or because his faculty of judgement has
not been sufficiently exercised by examples and real practice. Indeed,
the grand and only use of examples, is to sharpen the judgement. For as
regards the correctness and precision of the insight of the
understanding, examples are commonly injurious rather than otherwise,
because, as casus in terminis they seldom adequately fulfil the
conditions of the rule. Besides, they often weaken the power of our
understanding to apprehend rules or laws in their universality,
independently of particular circumstances of experience; and hence,
accustom us to employ them more as formulae than as principles.
Examples are thus the go-cart of the judgement, which he who is
naturally deficient in that faculty cannot afford to dispense with.

 [26] Deficiency in judgement is properly that which is called
 stupidity; and for such a failing we know no remedy. A dull or
 narrow-minded person, to whom nothing is wanting but a proper degree
 of understanding, may be improved by tuition, even so far as to
 deserve the epithet of learned. But as such persons frequently labour
 under a deficiency in the faculty of judgement, it is not uncommon to
 find men extremely learned who in the application of their science
 betray a lamentable degree this irremediable want.

But although general logic cannot give directions to the faculty of
judgement, the case is very different as regards transcendental logic,
insomuch that it appears to be the especial duty of the latter to
secure and direct, by means of determinate rules, the faculty of
judgement in the employment of the pure understanding. For, as a
doctrine, that is, as an endeavour to enlarge the sphere of the
understanding in regard to pure à priori cognitions, philosophy is
worse than useless, since from all the attempts hitherto made, little
or no ground has been gained. But, as a critique, in order to guard
against the mistakes of the faculty of judgement (lapsus judicii) in
the employment of the few pure conceptions of the understanding which
we possess, although its use is in this case purely negative,
philosophy is called upon to apply all its acuteness and penetration.

But transcendental philosophy has this peculiarity, that besides
indicating the rule, or rather the general condition for rules, which
is given in the pure conception of the understanding, it can, at the
same time, indicate à priori the case to which the rule must be
applied. The cause of the superiority which, in this respect,
transcendental philosophy possesses above all other sciences except
mathematics, lies in this: it treats of conceptions which must relate à
priori to their objects, whose objective validity consequently cannot
be demonstrated à posteriori, and is, at the same time, under the
obligation of presenting in general but sufficient tests, the
conditions under which objects can be given in harmony with those
conceptions; otherwise they would be mere logical forms, without
content, and not pure conceptions of the understanding.

Our transcendental doctrine of the faculty of judgement will contain
two chapters. The first will treat of the sensuous condition under
which alone pure conceptions of the understanding can be employed—that
is, of the schematism of the pure understanding. The second will treat
of those synthetical judgements which are derived à priori from pure
conceptions of the understanding under those conditions, and which lie
à priori at the foundation of all other cognitions, that is to say, it
will treat of the principles of the pure understanding.

TRANSCENDENTAL DOCTRINE OF THE FACULTY OF JUDGEMENT OR, ANALYTIC OF
PRINCIPLES

Chapter I. Of the Schematism at of the Pure Conceptions of the
Understanding

In all subsumptions of an object under a conception, the representation
of the object must be homogeneous with the conception; in other words,
the conception must contain that which is represented in the object to
be subsumed under it. For this is the meaning of the expression: “An
object is contained under a conception.” Thus the empirical conception
of a plate is homogeneous with the pure geometrical conception of a
circle, inasmuch as the roundness which is cogitated in the former is
intuited in the latter.

But pure conceptions of the understanding, when compared with empirical
intuitions, or even with sensuous intuitions in general, are quite
heterogeneous, and never can be discovered in any intuition. How then
is the subsumption of the latter under the former, and consequently the
application of the categories to phenomena, possible?—For it is
impossible to say, for example: “Causality can be intuited through the
senses and is contained in the phenomenon.”—This natural and important
question forms the real cause of the necessity of a transcendental
doctrine of the faculty of judgement, with the purpose, to wit, of
showing how pure conceptions of the understanding can be applied to
phenomena. In all other sciences, where the conceptions by which the
object is thought in the general are not so different and heterogeneous
from those which represent the object in concreto—as it is given, it is
quite unnecessary to institute any special inquiries concerning the
application of the former to the latter.

Now it is quite clear that there must be some third thing, which on the
one side is homogeneous with the category, and with the phenomenon on
the other, and so makes the application of the former to the latter
possible. This mediating representation must be pure (without any
empirical content), and yet must on the one side be intellectual, on
the other sensuous. Such a representation is the transcendental schema.

The conception of the understanding contains pure synthetical unity of
the manifold in general. Time, as the formal condition of the manifold
of the internal sense, consequently of the conjunction of all
representations, contains à priori a manifold in the pure intuition.
Now a transcendental determination of time is so far homogeneous with
the category, which constitutes the unity thereof, that it is universal
and rests upon a rule à priori. On the other hand, it is so far
homogeneous with the phenomenon, inasmuch as time is contained in every
empirical representation of the manifold. Thus an application of the
category to phenomena becomes possible, by means of the transcendental
determination of time, which, as the schema of the conceptions of the
understanding, mediates the subsumption of the latter under the former.

After what has been proved in our deduction of the categories, no one,
it is to be hoped, can hesitate as to the proper decision of the
question, whether the employment of these pure conceptions of the
understanding ought to be merely empirical or also transcendental; in
other words, whether the categories, as conditions of a possible
experience, relate à priori solely to phenomena, or whether, as
conditions of the possibility of things in general, their application
can be extended to objects as things in themselves. For we have there
seen that conceptions are quite impossible, and utterly without
signification, unless either to them, or at least to the elements of
which they consist, an object be given; and that, consequently, they
cannot possibly apply to objects as things in themselves without regard
to the question whether and how these may be given to us; and, further,
that the only manner in which objects can be given to us is by means of
the modification of our sensibility; and, finally, that pure à priori
conceptions, in addition to the function of the understanding in the
category, must contain à priori formal conditions of sensibility (of
the internal sense, namely), which again contain the general condition
under which alone the category can be applied to any object. This
formal and pure condition of sensibility, to which the conception of
the understanding is restricted in its employment, we shall name the
schema of the conception of the understanding, and the procedure of the
understanding with these schemata we shall call the schematism of the
pure understanding.

The schema is, in itself, always a mere product of the imagination.
But, as the synthesis of imagination has for its aim no single
intuition, but merely unity in the determination of sensibility, the
schema is clearly distinguishable from the image. Thus, if I place five
points one after another.... this is an image of the number five. On
the other hand, if I only think a number in general, which may be
either five or a hundred, this thought is rather the representation of
a method of representing in an image a sum (e.g., a thousand) in
conformity with a conception, than the image itself, an image which I
should find some little difficulty in reviewing, and comparing with the
conception. Now this representation of a general procedure of the
imagination to present its image to a conception, I call the schema of
this conception.

In truth, it is not images of objects, but schemata, which lie at the
foundation of our pure sensuous conceptions. No image could ever be
adequate to our conception of a triangle in general. For the
generalness of the conception it never could attain to, as this
includes under itself all triangles, whether right-angled,
acute-angled, etc., whilst the image would always be limited to a
single part of this sphere. The schema of the triangle can exist
nowhere else than in thought, and it indicates a rule of the synthesis
of the imagination in regard to pure figures in space. Still less is an
object of experience, or an image of the object, ever to the empirical
conception. On the contrary, the conception always relates immediately
to the schema of the imagination, as a rule for the determination of
our intuition, in conformity with a certain general conception. The
conception of a dog indicates a rule, according to which my imagination
can delineate the figure of a four-footed animal in general, without
being limited to any particular individual form which experience
presents to me, or indeed to any possible image that I can represent to
myself in concreto. This schematism of our understanding in regard to
phenomena and their mere form, is an art, hidden in the depths of the
human soul, whose true modes of action we shall only with difficulty
discover and unveil. Thus much only can we say: “The image is a product
of the empirical faculty of the productive imagination—the schema of
sensuous conceptions (of figures in space, for example) is a product,
and, as it were, a monogram of the pure imagination à priori, whereby
and according to which images first become possible, which, however,
can be connected with the conception only mediately by means of the
schema which they indicate, and are in themselves never fully adequate
to it.” On the other hand, the schema of a pure conception of the
understanding is something that cannot be reduced into any image—it is
nothing else than the pure synthesis expressed by the category,
conformably, to a rule of unity according to conceptions. It is a
transcendental product of the imagination, a product which concerns the
determination of the internal sense, according to conditions of its
form (time) in respect to all representations, in so far as these
representations must be conjoined à priori in one conception,
conformably to the unity of apperception.

Without entering upon a dry and tedious analysis of the essential
requisites of transcendental schemata of the pure conceptions of the
understanding, we shall rather proceed at once to give an explanation
of them according to the order of the categories, and in connection
therewith.

For the external sense the pure image of all quantities (quantorum) is
space; the pure image of all objects of sense in general, is time. But
the pure schema of quantity (quantitatis) as a conception of the
understanding, is number, a representation which comprehends the
successive addition of one to one (homogeneous quantities). Thus,
number is nothing else than the unity of the synthesis of the manifold
in a homogeneous intuition, by means of my generating time itself in my
apprehension of the intuition.

Reality, in the pure conception of the understanding, is that which
corresponds to a sensation in general; that, consequently, the
conception of which indicates a being (in time). Negation is that the
conception of which represents a not-being (in time). The opposition of
these two consists therefore in the difference of one and the same
time, as a time filled or a time empty. Now as time is only the form of
intuition, consequently of objects as phenomena, that which in objects
corresponds to sensation is the transcendental matter of all objects as
things in themselves (Sachheit, reality). Now every sensation has a
degree or quantity by which it can fill time, that is to say, the
internal sense in respect of the representation of an object, more or
less, until it vanishes into nothing (= 0 = negatio). Thus there is a
relation and connection between reality and negation, or rather a
transition from the former to the latter, which makes every reality
representable to us as a quantum; and the schema of a reality as the
quantity of something in so far as it fills time, is exactly this
continuous and uniform generation of the reality in time, as we descend
in time from the sensation which has a certain degree, down to the
vanishing thereof, or gradually ascend from negation to the quantity
thereof.

The schema of substance is the permanence of the real in time; that is,
the representation of it as a substratum of the empirical determination
of time; a substratum which therefore remains, whilst all else changes.
(Time passes not, but in it passes the existence of the changeable. To
time, therefore, which is itself unchangeable and permanent,
corresponds that which in the phenomenon is unchangeable in existence,
that is, substance, and it is only by it that the succession and
coexistence of phenomena can be determined in regard to time.)

The schema of cause and of the causality of a thing is the real which,
when posited, is always followed by something else. It consists,
therefore, in the succession of the manifold, in so far as that
succession is subjected to a rule.

The schema of community (reciprocity of action and reaction), or the
reciprocal causality of substances in respect of their accidents, is
the coexistence of the determinations of the one with those of the
other, according to a general rule.

The schema of possibility is the accordance of the synthesis of
different representations with the conditions of time in general (as,
for example, opposites cannot exist together at the same time in the
same thing, but only after each other), and is therefore the
determination of the representation of a thing at any time.

The schema of reality is existence in a determined time.

The schema of necessity is the existence of an object in all time.

It is clear, from all this, that the schema of the category of quantity
contains and represents the generation (synthesis) of time itself, in
the successive apprehension of an object; the schema of quality the
synthesis of sensation with the representation of time, or the filling
up of time; the schema of relation the relation of perceptions to each
other in all time (that is, according to a rule of the determination of
time): and finally, the schema of modality and its categories, time
itself, as the correlative of the determination of an object—whether it
does belong to time, and how. The schemata, therefore, are nothing but
à priori determinations of time according to rules, and these, in
regard to all possible objects, following the arrangement of the
categories, relate to the series in time, the content in time, the
order in time, and finally, to the complex or totality in time.

Hence it is apparent that the schematism of the understanding, by means
of the transcendental synthesis of the imagination, amounts to nothing
else than the unity of the manifold of intuition in the internal sense,
and thus indirectly to the unity of apperception, as a function
corresponding to the internal sense (a receptivity). Thus, the schemata
of the pure conceptions of the understanding are the true and only
conditions whereby our understanding receives an application to
objects, and consequently significance. Finally, therefore, the
categories are only capable of empirical use, inasmuch as they serve
merely to subject phenomena to the universal rules of synthesis, by
means of an à priori necessary unity (on account of the necessary union
of all consciousness in one original apperception); and so to render
them susceptible of a complete connection in one experience. But within
this whole of possible experience lie all our cognitions, and in the
universal relation to this experience consists transcendental truth,
which antecedes all empirical truth, and renders the latter possible.

It is, however, evident at first sight, that although the schemata of
sensibility are the sole agents in realizing the categories, they do,
nevertheless, also restrict them, that is, they limit the categories by
conditions which lie beyond the sphere of understanding—namely, in
sensibility. Hence the schema is properly only the phenomenon, or the
sensuous conception of an object in harmony with the category. (Numerus
est quantitas phaenomenon—sensatio realitas phaenomenon; constans et
perdurabile rerum substantia phaenomenon—aeternitas, necessitas,
phaenomena, etc.) Now, if we remove a restrictive condition, we thereby
amplify, it appears, the formerly limited conception. In this way, the
categories in their pure signification, free from all conditions of
sensibility, ought to be valid of things as they are, and not, as the
schemata represent them, merely as they appear; and consequently the
categories must have a significance far more extended, and wholly
independent of all schemata. In truth, there does always remain to the
pure conceptions of the understanding, after abstracting every sensuous
condition, a value and significance, which is, however, merely logical.
But in this case, no object is given them, and therefore they have no
meaning sufficient to afford us a conception of an object. The notion
of substance, for example, if we leave out the sensuous determination
of permanence, would mean nothing more than a something which can be
cogitated as subject, without the possibility of becoming a predicate
to anything else. Of this representation I can make nothing, inasmuch
as it does not indicate to me what determinations the thing possesses
which must thus be valid as premier subject. Consequently, the
categories, without schemata are merely functions of the understanding
for the production of conceptions, but do not represent any object.
This significance they derive from sensibility, which at the same time
realizes the understanding and restricts it.

Chapter II. System of all Principles of the Pure Understanding

In the foregoing chapter we have merely considered the general
conditions under which alone the transcendental faculty of judgement is
justified in using the pure conceptions of the understanding for
synthetical judgements. Our duty at present is to exhibit in systematic
connection those judgements which the understanding really produces à
priori. For this purpose, our table of the categories will certainly
afford us the natural and safe guidance. For it is precisely the
categories whose application to possible experience must constitute all
pure à priori cognition of the understanding; and the relation of which
to sensibility will, on that very account, present us with a complete
and systematic catalogue of all the transcendental principles of the
use of the understanding.

Principles à priori are so called, not merely because they contain in
themselves the grounds of other judgements, but also because they
themselves are not grounded in higher and more general cognitions. This
peculiarity, however, does not raise them altogether above the need of
a proof. For although there could be found no higher cognition, and
therefore no objective proof, and although such a principle rather
serves as the foundation for all cognition of the object, this by no
means hinders us from drawing a proof from the subjective sources of
the possibility of the cognition of an object. Such a proof is
necessary, moreover, because without it the principle might be liable
to the imputation of being a mere gratuitous assertion.

In the second place, we shall limit our investigations to those
principles which relate to the categories. For as to the principles of
transcendental æsthetic, according to which space and time are the
conditions of the possibility of things as phenomena, as also the
restriction of these principles, namely, that they cannot be applied to
objects as things in themselves—these, of course, do not fall within
the scope of our present inquiry. In like manner, the principles of
mathematical science form no part of this system, because they are all
drawn from intuition, and not from the pure conception of the
understanding. The possibility of these principles, however, will
necessarily be considered here, inasmuch as they are synthetical
judgements à priori, not indeed for the purpose of proving their
accuracy and apodeictic certainty, which is unnecessary, but merely to
render conceivable and deduce the possibility of such evident à priori
cognitions.

But we shall have also to speak of the principle of analytical
judgements, in opposition to synthetical judgements, which is the
proper subject of our inquiries, because this very opposition will free
the theory of the latter from all ambiguity, and place it clearly
before our eyes in its true nature.

SYSTEM OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE PURE UNDERSTANDING

Section I. Of the Supreme Principle of all Analytical Judgements

Whatever may be the content of our cognition, and in whatever manner
our cognition may be related to its object, the universal, although
only negative conditions of all our judgements is that they do not
contradict themselves; otherwise these judgements are in themselves
(even without respect to the object) nothing. But although there may
exist no contradiction in our judgement, it may nevertheless connect
conceptions in such a manner that they do not correspond to the object,
or without any grounds either à priori or à posteriori for arriving at
such a judgement, and thus, without being self-contradictory, a
judgement may nevertheless be either false or groundless.

Now, the proposition: “No subject can have a predicate that contradicts
it,” is called the principle of contradiction, and is a universal but
purely negative criterion of all truth. But it belongs to logic alone,
because it is valid of cognitions, merely as cognitions and without
respect to their content, and declares that the contradiction entirely
nullifies them. We can also, however, make a positive use of this
principle, that is, not merely to banish falsehood and error (in so far
as it rests upon contradiction), but also for the cognition of truth.
For if the judgement is analytical, be it affirmative or negative, its
truth must always be recognizable by means of the principle of
contradiction. For the contrary of that which lies and is cogitated as
conception in the cognition of the object will be always properly
negatived, but the conception itself must always be affirmed of the
object, inasmuch as the contrary thereof would be in contradiction to
the object.

We must therefore hold the principle of contradiction to be the
universal and fully sufficient Principle of all analytical cognition.
But as a sufficient criterion of truth, it has no further utility or
authority. For the fact that no cognition can be at variance with this
principle without nullifying itself, constitutes this principle the
sine qua non, but not the determining ground of the truth of our
cognition. As our business at present is properly with the synthetical
part of our knowledge only, we shall always be on our guard not to
transgress this inviolable principle; but at the same time not to
expect from it any direct assistance in the establishment of the truth
of any synthetical proposition.

There exists, however, a formula of this celebrated principle—a
principle merely formal and entirely without content—which contains a
synthesis that has been inadvertently and quite unnecessarily mixed up
with it. It is this: “It is impossible for a thing to be and not to be
at the same time.” Not to mention the superfluousness of the addition
of the word impossible to indicate the apodeictic certainty, which
ought to be self-evident from the proposition itself, the proposition
is affected by the condition of time, and as it were says: “A thing =
A, which is something = B, cannot at the same time be non-B.” But both,
B as well as non-B, may quite well exist in succession. For example, a
man who is young cannot at the same time be old; but the same man can
very well be at one time young, and at another not young, that is, old.
Now the principle of contradiction as a merely logical proposition must
not by any means limit its application merely to relations of time, and
consequently a formula like the preceding is quite foreign to its true
purpose. The misunderstanding arises in this way. We first of all
separate a predicate of a thing from the conception of the thing, and
afterwards connect with this predicate its opposite, and hence do not
establish any contradiction with the subject, but only with its
predicate, which has been conjoined with the subject synthetically—a
contradiction, moreover, which obtains only when the first and second
predicate are affirmed in the same time. If I say: “A man who is
ignorant is not learned,” the condition “at the same time” must be
added, for he who is at one time ignorant, may at another be learned.
But if I say: “No ignorant man is a learned man,” the proposition is
analytical, because the characteristic ignorance is now a constituent
part of the conception of the subject; and in this case the negative
proposition is evident immediately from the proposition of
contradiction, without the necessity of adding the condition “the same
time.” This is the reason why I have altered the formula of this
principle—an alteration which shows very clearly the nature of an
analytical proposition.

Section II. Of the Supreme Principle of all Synthetical Judgements

The explanation of the possibility of synthetical judgements is a task
with which general logic has nothing to do; indeed she needs not even
be acquainted with its name. But in transcendental logic it is the most
important matter to be dealt with—indeed the only one, if the question
is of the possibility of synthetical judgements à priori, the
conditions and extent of their validity. For when this question is
fully decided, it can reach its aim with perfect ease, the
determination, to wit, of the extent and limits of the pure
understanding.

In an analytical judgement I do not go beyond the given conception, in
order to arrive at some decision respecting it. If the judgement is
affirmative, I predicate of the conception only that which was already
cogitated in it; if negative, I merely exclude from the conception its
contrary. But in synthetical judgements, I must go beyond the given
conception, in order to cogitate, in relation with it, something quite
different from that which was cogitated in it, a relation which is
consequently never one either of identity or contradiction, and by
means of which the truth or error of the judgement cannot be discerned
merely from the judgement itself.

Granted, then, that we must go out beyond a given conception, in order
to compare it synthetically with another, a third thing is necessary,
in which alone the synthesis of two conceptions can originate. Now what
is this tertium quid that is to be the medium of all synthetical
judgements? It is only a complex in which all our representations are
contained, the internal sense to wit, and its form à priori, time.

The synthesis of our representations rests upon the imagination; their
synthetical unity (which is requisite to a judgement), upon the unity
of apperception. In this, therefore, is to be sought the possibility of
synthetical judgements, and as all three contain the sources of à
priori representations, the possibility of pure synthetical judgements
also; nay, they are necessary upon these grounds, if we are to possess
a knowledge of objects, which rests solely upon the synthesis of
representations.

If a cognition is to have objective reality, that is, to relate to an
object, and possess sense and meaning in respect to it, it is necessary
that the object be given in some way or another. Without this, our
conceptions are empty, and we may indeed have thought by means of them,
but by such thinking we have not, in fact, cognized anything, we have
merely played with representation. To give an object, if this
expression be understood in the sense of “to present” the object, not
mediately but immediately in intuition, means nothing else than to
apply the representation of it to experience, be that experience real
or only possible. Space and time themselves, pure as these conceptions
are from all that is empirical, and certain as it is that they are
represented fully à priori in the mind, would be completely without
objective validity, and without sense and significance, if their
necessary use in the objects of experience were not shown. Nay, the
representation of them is a mere schema, that always relates to the
reproductive imagination, which calls up the objects of experience,
without which they have no meaning. And so it is with all conceptions
without distinction.

The possibility of experience is, then, that which gives objective
reality to all our à priori cognitions. Now experience depends upon the
synthetical unity of phenomena, that is, upon a synthesis according to
conceptions of the object of phenomena in general, a synthesis without
which experience never could become knowledge, but would be merely a
rhapsody of perceptions, never fitting together into any connected
text, according to rules of a thoroughly united (possible)
consciousness, and therefore never subjected to the transcendental and
necessary unity of apperception. Experience has therefore for a
foundation, à priori principles of its form, that is to say, general
rules of unity in the synthesis of phenomena, the objective reality of
which rules, as necessary conditions even of the possibility of
experience can which rules, as necessary conditions—even of the
possibility of experience—can always be shown in experience. But apart
from this relation, à priori synthetical propositions are absolutely
impossible, because they have no third term, that is, no pure object,
in which the synthetical unity can exhibit the objective reality of its
conceptions.

Although, then, respecting space, or the forms which productive
imagination describes therein, we do cognize much à priori in
synthetical judgements, and are really in no need of experience for
this purpose, such knowledge would nevertheless amount to nothing but a
busy trifling with a mere chimera, were not space to be considered as
the condition of the phenomena which constitute the material of
external experience. Hence those pure synthetical judgements do relate,
though but mediately, to possible experience, or rather to the
possibility of experience, and upon that alone is founded the objective
validity of their synthesis.

While then, on the one hand, experience, as empirical synthesis, is the
only possible mode of cognition which gives reality to all other
synthesis; on the other hand, this latter synthesis, as cognition à
priori, possesses truth, that is, accordance with its object, only in
so far as it contains nothing more than what is necessary to the
synthetical unity of experience.

Accordingly, the supreme principle of all synthetical judgements is:
“Every object is subject to the necessary conditions of the synthetical
unity of the manifold of intuition in a possible experience.”

À priori synthetical judgements are possible when we apply the formal
conditions of the à priori intuition, the synthesis of the imagination,
and the necessary unity of that synthesis in a transcendental
apperception, to a possible cognition of experience, and say: “The
conditions of the possibility of experience in general are at the same
time conditions of the possibility of the objects of experience, and
have, for that reason, objective validity in an à priori synthetical
judgement.”

Section III. Systematic Representation of all Synthetical Principles of
the Pure Understanding

That principles exist at all is to be ascribed solely to the pure
understanding, which is not only the faculty of rules in regard to that
which happens, but is even the source of principles according to which
everything that can be presented to us as an object is necessarily
subject to rules, because without such rules we never could attain to
cognition of an object. Even the laws of nature, if they are
contemplated as principles of the empirical use of the understanding,
possess also a characteristic of necessity, and we may therefore at
least expect them to be determined upon grounds which are valid à
priori and antecedent to all experience. But all laws of nature,
without distinction, are subject to higher principles of the
understanding, inasmuch as the former are merely applications of the
latter to particular cases of experience. These higher principles alone
therefore give the conception, which contains the necessary condition,
and, as it were, the exponent of a rule; experience, on the other hand,
gives the case which comes under the rule.

There is no danger of our mistaking merely empirical principles for
principles of the pure understanding, or conversely; for the character
of necessity, according to conceptions which distinguish the latter,
and the absence of this in every empirical proposition, how extensively
valid soever it may be, is a perfect safeguard against confounding
them. There are, however, pure principles à priori, which nevertheless
I should not ascribe to the pure understanding—for this reason, that
they are not derived from pure conceptions, but (although by the
mediation of the understanding) from pure intuitions. But understanding
is the faculty of conceptions. Such principles mathematical science
possesses, but their application to experience, consequently their
objective validity, nay the possibility of such à priori synthetical
cognitions (the deduction thereof) rests entirely upon the pure
understanding.

On this account, I shall not reckon among my principles those of
mathematics; though I shall include those upon the possibility and
objective validity à priori, of principles of the mathematical science,
which, consequently, are to be looked upon as the principle of these,
and which proceed from conceptions to intuition, and not from intuition
to conceptions.

In the application of the pure conceptions of the understanding to
possible experience, the employment of their synthesis is either
mathematical or dynamical, for it is directed partly on the intuition
alone, partly on the existence of a phenomenon. But the à priori
conditions of intuition are in relation to a possible experience
absolutely necessary, those of the existence of objects of a possible
empirical intuition are in themselves contingent. Hence the principles
of the mathematical use of the categories will possess a character of
absolute necessity, that is, will be apodeictic; those, on the other
hand, of the dynamical use, the character of an à priori necessity
indeed, but only under the condition of empirical thought in an
experience, therefore only mediately and indirectly. Consequently they
will not possess that immediate evidence which is peculiar to the
former, although their application to experience does not, for that
reason, lose its truth and certitude. But of this point we shall be
better able to judge at the conclusion of this system of principles.

The table of the categories is naturally our guide to the table of
principles, because these are nothing else than rules for the objective
employment of the former. Accordingly, all principles of the pure
understanding are:

                                1
                              Axioms
                           of Intuition

               2                                    3
          Anticipations                          Analogies
          of Perception                        of Experience
                                4
                          Postulates of
                        Empirical Thought
                           in general

These appellations I have chosen advisedly, in order that we might not
lose sight of the distinctions in respect of the evidence and the
employment of these principles. It will, however, soon appear that—a
fact which concerns both the evidence of these principles, and the à
priori determination of phenomena—according to the categories of
quantity and quality (if we attend merely to the form of these), the
principles of these categories are distinguishable from those of the
two others, in as much as the former are possessed of an intuitive, but
the latter of a merely discursive, though in both instances a complete,
certitude. I shall therefore call the former mathematical, and the
latter dynamical principles.[27] It must be observed, however, that by
these terms I mean just as little in the one case the principles of
mathematics as those of general (physical) dynamics in the other. I
have here in view merely the principles of the pure understanding, in
their application to the internal sense (without distinction of the
representations given therein), by means of which the sciences of
mathematics and dynamics become possible. Accordingly, I have named
these principles rather with reference to their application than their
content; and I shall now proceed to consider them in the order in which
they stand in the table.

 [27] All combination (conjunctio) is either composition (compositio)
 or connection (nexus). The former is the synthesis of a manifold, the
 parts of which do not necessarily belong to each other. For example,
 the two triangles into which a square is divided by a diagonal, do not
 necessarily belong to each other, and of this kind is the synthesis of
 the homogeneous in everything that can be mathematically considered.
 This synthesis can be divided into those of aggregation and coalition,
 the former of which is applied to extensive, the latter to intensive
 quantities. The second sort of combination (nexus) is the synthesis of
 a manifold, in so far as its parts do belong necessarily to each
 other; for example, the accident to a substance, or the effect to the
 cause. Consequently it is a synthesis of that which though
 heterogeneous, is represented as connected à priori. This
 combination—not an arbitrary one—I entitle dynamical because it
 concerns the connection of the existence of the manifold. This, again,
 may be divided into the physical synthesis, of the phenomena divided
 among each other, and the metaphysical synthesis, or the connection of
 phenomena à priori in the faculty of cognition.

1. AXIOMS OF INTUITION.

The principle of these is: All Intuitions are Extensive Quantities.

PROOF.

All phenomena contain, as regards their form, an intuition in space and
time, which lies à priori at the foundation of all without exception.
Phenomena, therefore, cannot be apprehended, that is, received into
empirical consciousness otherwise than through the synthesis of a
manifold, through which the representations of a determinate space or
time are generated; that is to say, through the composition of the
homogeneous and the consciousness of the synthetical unity of this
manifold (homogeneous). Now the consciousness of a homogeneous manifold
in intuition, in so far as thereby the representation of an object is
rendered possible, is the conception of a quantity (quanti).
Consequently, even the perception of an object as phenomenon is
possible only through the same synthetical unity of the manifold of the
given sensuous intuition, through which the unity of the composition of
the homogeneous manifold in the conception of a quantity is cogitated;
that is to say, all phenomena are quantities, and extensive quantities,
because as intuitions in space or time they must be represented by
means of the same synthesis through which space and time themselves are
determined.

An extensive quantity I call that wherein the representation of the
parts renders possible (and therefore necessarily antecedes) the
representation of the whole. I cannot represent to myself any line,
however small, without drawing it in thought, that is, without
generating from a point all its parts one after another, and in this
way alone producing this intuition. Precisely the same is the case with
every, even the smallest, portion of time. I cogitate therein only the
successive progress from one moment to another, and hence, by means of
the different portions of time and the addition of them, a determinate
quantity of time is produced. As the pure intuition in all phenomena is
either time or space, so is every phenomenon in its character of
intuition an extensive quantity, inasmuch as it can only be cognized in
our apprehension by successive synthesis (from part to part). All
phenomena are, accordingly, to be considered as aggregates, that is, as
a collection of previously given parts; which is not the case with
every sort of quantities, but only with those which are represented and
apprehended by us as extensive.

On this successive synthesis of the productive imagination, in the
generation of figures, is founded the mathematics of extension, or
geometry, with its axioms, which express the conditions of sensuous
intuition à priori, under which alone the schema of a pure conception
of external intuition can exist; for example, “be tween two points only
one straight line is possible,” “two straight lines cannot enclose a
space,” etc. These are the axioms which properly relate only to
quantities (quanta) as such.

But, as regards the quantity of a thing (quantitas), that is to say,
the answer to the question: “How large is this or that object?”
although, in respect to this question, we have various propositions
synthetical and immediately certain (indemonstrabilia); we have, in the
proper sense of the term, no axioms. For example, the propositions: “If
equals be added to equals, the wholes are equal”; “If equals be taken
from equals, the remainders are equal”; are analytical, because I am
immediately conscious of the identity of the production of the one
quantity with the production of the other; whereas axioms must be à
priori synthetical propositions. On the other hand, the self-evident
propositions as to the relation of numbers, are certainly synthetical
but not universal, like those of geometry, and for this reason cannot
be called axioms, but numerical formulae. That 7 + 5 = 12 is not an
analytical proposition. For neither in the representation of seven, nor
of five, nor of the composition of the two numbers, do I cogitate the
number twelve. (Whether I cogitate the number in the addition of both,
is not at present the question; for in the case of an analytical
proposition, the only point is whether I really cogitate the predicate
in the representation of the subject.) But although the proposition is
synthetical, it is nevertheless only a singular proposition. In so far
as regard is here had merely to the synthesis of the homogeneous (the
units), it cannot take place except in one manner, although our use of
these numbers is afterwards general. If I say: “A triangle can be
constructed with three lines, any two of which taken together are
greater than the third,” I exercise merely the pure function of the
productive imagination, which may draw the lines longer or shorter and
construct the angles at its pleasure. On the contrary, the number seven
is possible only in one manner, and so is likewise the number twelve,
which results from the synthesis of seven and five. Such propositions,
then, cannot be termed axioms (for in that case we should have an
infinity of these), but numerical formulae.

This transcendental principle of the mathematics of phenomena greatly
enlarges our à priori cognition. For it is by this principle alone that
pure mathematics is rendered applicable in all its precision to objects
of experience, and without it the validity of this application would
not be so self-evident; on the contrary, contradictions and confusions
have often arisen on this very point. Phenomena are not things in
themselves. Empirical intuition is possible only through pure intuition
(of space and time); consequently, what geometry affirms of the latter,
is indisputably valid of the former. All evasions, such as the
statement that objects of sense do not conform to the rules of
construction in space (for example, to the rule of the infinite
divisibility of lines or angles), must fall to the ground. For, if
these objections hold good, we deny to space, and with it to all
mathematics, objective validity, and no longer know wherefore, and how
far, mathematics can be applied to phenomena. The synthesis of spaces
and times as the essential form of all intuition, is that which renders
possible the apprehension of a phenomenon, and therefore every external
experience, consequently all cognition of the objects of experience;
and whatever mathematics in its pure use proves of the former, must
necessarily hold good of the latter. All objections are but the
chicaneries of an ill-instructed reason, which erroneously thinks to
liberate the objects of sense from the formal conditions of our
sensibility, and represents these, although mere phenomena, as things
in themselves, presented as such to our understanding. But in this
case, no à priori synthetical cognition of them could be possible,
consequently not through pure conceptions of space and the science
which determines these conceptions, that is to say, geometry, would
itself be impossible.

2. ANTICIPATIONS OF PERCEPTION.

The principle of these is: In all phenomena the Real, that which is an
object of sensation, has Intensive Quantity, that is, has a Degree.

PROOF.

Perception is empirical consciousness, that is to say, a consciousness
which contains an element of sensation. Phenomena as objects of
perception are not pure, that is, merely formal intuitions, like space
and time, for they cannot be perceived in themselves.[28] They contain,
then, over and above the intuition, the materials for an object
(through which is represented something existing in space or time),
that is to say, they contain the real of sensation, as a representation
merely subjective, which gives us merely the consciousness that the
subject is affected, and which we refer to some external object. Now, a
gradual transition from empirical consciousness to pure consciousness
is possible, inasmuch as the real in this consciousness entirely
vanishes, and there remains a merely formal consciousness (à priori) of
the manifold in time and space; consequently there is possible a
synthesis also of the production of the quantity of a sensation from
its commencement, that is, from the pure intuition = 0 onwards up to a
certain quantity of the sensation. Now as sensation in itself is not an
objective representation, and in it is to be found neither the
intuition of space nor of time, it cannot possess any extensive
quantity, and yet there does belong to it a quantity (and that by means
of its apprehension, in which empirical consciousness can within a
certain time rise from nothing = 0 up to its given amount),
consequently an intensive quantity. And thus we must ascribe intensive
quantity, that is, a degree of influence on sense to all objects of
perception, in so far as this perception contains sensation.

 [28] They can be perceived only as phenomena, and some part of them
 must always belong to the non-ego; whereas pure intuitions are
 entirely the products of the mind itself, and as such are cognized _in
 themselves.—Tr_

All cognition, by means of which I am enabled to cognize and determine
à priori what belongs to empirical cognition, may be called an
anticipation; and without doubt this is the sense in which Epicurus
employed his expression prholepsis. But as there is in phenomena
something which is never cognized à priori, which on this account
constitutes the proper difference between pure and empirical cognition,
that is to say, sensation (as the matter of perception), it follows,
that sensation is just that element in cognition which cannot be at all
anticipated. On the other hand, we might very well term the pure
determinations in space and time, as well in regard to figure as to
quantity, anticipations of phenomena, because they represent à priori
that which may always be given à posteriori in experience. But suppose
that in every sensation, as sensation in general, without any
particular sensation being thought of, there existed something which
could be cognized à priori, this would deserve to be called
anticipation in a special sense—special, because it may seem surprising
to forestall experience, in that which concerns the matter of
experience, and which we can only derive from itself. Yet such really
is the case here.

Apprehension[29], by means of sensation alone, fills only one moment,
that is, if I do not take into consideration a succession of many
sensations. As that in the phenomenon, the apprehension of which is not
a successive synthesis advancing from parts to an entire
representation, sensation has therefore no extensive quantity; the want
of sensation in a moment of time would represent it as empty,
consequently = 0. That which in the empirical intuition corresponds to
sensation is reality (realitas phaenomenon); that which corresponds to
the absence of it, negation = 0. Now every sensation is capable of a
diminution, so that it can decrease, and thus gradually disappear.
Therefore, between reality in a phenomenon and negation, there exists a
continuous concatenation of many possible intermediate sensations, the
difference of which from each other is always smaller than that between
the given sensation and zero, or complete negation. That is to say, the
real in a phenomenon has always a quantity, which however is not
discoverable in apprehension, inasmuch as apprehension take place by
means of mere sensation in one instant, and not by the successive
synthesis of many sensations, and therefore does not progress from
parts to the whole. Consequently, it has a quantity, but not an
extensive quantity.

 [29] Apprehension is the Kantian word for preception, in the largest
 sense in which we employ that term. It is the genus which includes
 under i, as species, perception proper and sensation proper—Tr

Now that quantity which is apprehended only as unity, and in which
plurality can be represented only by approximation to negation = 0, I
term intensive quantity. Consequently, reality in a phenomenon has
intensive quantity, that is, a degree. If we consider this reality as
cause (be it of sensation or of another reality in the phenomenon, for
example, a change), we call the degree of reality in its character of
cause a momentum, for example, the momentum of weight; and for this
reason, that the degree only indicates that quantity the apprehension
of which is not successive, but instantaneous. This, however, I touch
upon only in passing, for with causality I have at present nothing to
do.

Accordingly, every sensation, consequently every reality in phenomena,
however small it may be, has a degree, that is, an intensive quantity,
which may always be lessened, and between reality and negation there
exists a continuous connection of possible realities, and possible
smaller perceptions. Every colour—for example, red—has a degree, which,
be it ever so small, is never the smallest, and so is it always with
heat, the momentum of weight, etc.

This property of quantities, according to which no part of them is the
smallest possible (no part simple), is called their continuity. Space
and time are quanta continua, because no part of them can be given,
without enclosing it within boundaries (points and moments),
consequently, this given part is itself a space or a time. Space,
therefore, consists only of spaces, and time of times. Points and
moments are only boundaries, that is, the mere places or positions of
their limitation. But places always presuppose intuitions which are to
limit or determine them; and we cannot conceive either space or time
composed of constituent parts which are given before space or time.
Such quantities may also be called flowing, because synthesis (of the
productive imagination) in the production of these quantities is a
progression in time, the continuity of which we are accustomed to
indicate by the expression flowing.

All phenomena, then, are continuous quantities, in respect both to
intuition and mere perception (sensation, and with it reality). In the
former case they are extensive quantities; in the latter, intensive.
When the synthesis of the manifold of a phenomenon is interrupted,
there results merely an aggregate of several phenomena, and not
properly a phenomenon as a quantity, which is not produced by the mere
continuation of the productive synthesis of a certain kind, but by the
repetition of a synthesis always ceasing. For example, if I call
thirteen dollars a sum or quantity of money, I employ the term quite
correctly, inasmuch as I understand by thirteen dollars the value of a
mark in standard silver, which is, to be sure, a continuous quantity,
in which no part is the smallest, but every part might constitute a
piece of money, which would contain material for still smaller pieces.
If, however, by the words thirteen dollars I understand so many coins
(be their value in silver what it may), it would be quite erroneous to
use the expression a quantity of dollars; on the contrary, I must call
them aggregate, that is, a number of coins. And as in every number we
must have unity as the foundation, so a phenomenon taken as unity is a
quantity, and as such always a continuous quantity (quantum continuum).

Now, seeing all phenomena, whether considered as extensive or
intensive, are continuous quantities, the proposition: “All change
(transition of a thing from one state into another) is continuous,”
might be proved here easily, and with mathematical evidence, were it
not that the causality of a change lies, entirely beyond the bounds of
a transcendental philosophy, and presupposes empirical principles. For
of the possibility of a cause which changes the condition of things,
that is, which determines them to the contrary to a certain given
state, the understanding gives us à priori no knowledge; not merely
because it has no insight into the possibility of it (for such insight
is absent in several à priori cognitions), but because the notion of
change concerns only certain determinations of phenomena, which
experience alone can acquaint us with, while their cause lies in the
unchangeable. But seeing that we have nothing which we could here
employ but the pure fundamental conceptions of all possible experience,
among which of course nothing empirical can be admitted, we dare not,
without injuring the unity of our system, anticipate general physical
science, which is built upon certain fundamental experiences.

Nevertheless, we are in no want of proofs of the great influence which
the principle above developed exercises in the anticipation of
perceptions, and even in supplying the want of them, so far as to
shield us against the false conclusions which otherwise we might rashly
draw.

If all reality in perception has a degree, between which and negation
there is an endless sequence of ever smaller degrees, and if,
nevertheless, every sense must have a determinate degree of receptivity
for sensations; no perception, and consequently no experience is
possible, which can prove, either immediately or mediately, an entire
absence of all reality in a phenomenon; in other words, it is
impossible ever to draw from experience a proof of the existence of
empty space or of empty time. For in the first place, an entire absence
of reality in a sensuous intuition cannot of course be an object of
perception; secondly, such absence cannot be deduced from the
contemplation of any single phenomenon, and the difference of the
degrees in its reality; nor ought it ever to be admitted in explanation
of any phenomenon. For if even the complete intuition of a determinate
space or time is thoroughly real, that is, if no part thereof is empty,
yet because every reality has its degree, which, with the extensive
quantity of the phenomenon unchanged, can diminish through endless
gradations down to nothing (the void), there must be infinitely
graduated degrees, with which space or time is filled, and the
intensive quantity in different phenomena may be smaller or greater,
although the extensive quantity of the intuition remains equal and
unaltered.

We shall give an example of this. Almost all natural philosophers,
remarking a great difference in the quantity of the matter of different
kinds in bodies with the same volume (partly on account of the momentum
of gravity or weight, partly on account of the momentum of resistance
to other bodies in motion), conclude unanimously that this volume
(extensive quantity of the phenomenon) must be void in all bodies,
although in different proportion. But who would suspect that these for
the most part mathematical and mechanical inquirers into nature should
ground this conclusion solely on a metaphysical hypothesis—a sort of
hypothesis which they profess to disparage and avoid? Yet this they do,
in assuming that the real in space (I must not here call it
impenetrability or weight, because these are empirical conceptions) is
always identical, and can only be distinguished according to its
extensive quantity, that is, multiplicity. Now to this presupposition,
for which they can have no ground in experience, and which consequently
is merely metaphysical, I oppose a transcendental demonstration, which
it is true will not explain the difference in the filling up of spaces,
but which nevertheless completely does away with the supposed necessity
of the above-mentioned presupposition that we cannot explain the said
difference otherwise than by the hypothesis of empty spaces. This
demonstration, moreover, has the merit of setting the understanding at
liberty to conceive this distinction in a different manner, if the
explanation of the fact requires any such hypothesis. For we perceive
that although two equal spaces may be completely filled by matters
altogether different, so that in neither of them is there left a single
point wherein matter is not present, nevertheless, every reality has
its degree (of resistance or of weight), which, without diminution of
the extensive quantity, can become less and less ad infinitum, before
it passes into nothingness and disappears. Thus an expansion which
fills a space—for example, caloric, or any other reality in the
phenomenal world—can decrease in its degrees to infinity, yet without
leaving the smallest part of the space empty; on the contrary, filling
it with those lesser degrees as completely as another phenomenon could
with greater. My intention here is by no means to maintain that this is
really the case with the difference of matters, in regard to their
specific gravity; I wish only to prove, from a principle of the pure
understanding, that the nature of our perceptions makes such a mode of
explanation possible, and that it is erroneous to regard the real in a
phenomenon as equal quoad its degree, and different only quoad its
aggregation and extensive quantity, and this, too, on the pretended
authority of an à priori principle of the understanding.

Nevertheless, this principle of the anticipation of perception must
somewhat startle an inquirer whom initiation into transcendental
philosophy has rendered cautious. We must naturally entertain some
doubt whether or not the understanding can enounce any such synthetical
proposition as that respecting the degree of all reality in phenomena,
and consequently the possibility of the internal difference of
sensation itself—abstraction being made of its empirical quality. Thus
it is a question not unworthy of solution: “How the understanding can
pronounce synthetically and à priori respecting phenomena, and thus
anticipate these, even in that which is peculiarly and merely
empirical, that, namely, which concerns sensation itself?”

The quality of sensation is in all cases merely empirical, and cannot
be represented à priori (for example, colours, taste, etc.). But the
real—that which corresponds to sensation—in opposition to negation = 0,
only represents something the conception of which in itself contains a
being (ein seyn), and signifies nothing but the synthesis in an
empirical consciousness. That is to say, the empirical consciousness in
the internal sense can be raised from 0 to every higher degree, so that
the very same extensive quantity of intuition, an illuminated surface,
for example, excites as great a sensation as an aggregate of many other
surfaces less illuminated. We can therefore make complete abstraction
of the extensive quantity of a phenomenon, and represent to ourselves
in the mere sensation in a certain momentum, a synthesis of homogeneous
ascension from 0 up to the given empirical consciousness, All
sensations therefore as such are given only à posteriori, but this
property thereof, namely, that they have a degree, can be known à
priori. It is worthy of remark, that in respect to quantities in
general, we can cognize à priori only a single quality, namely,
continuity; but in respect to all quality (the real in phenomena), we
cannot cognize à priori anything more than the intensive quantity
thereof, namely, that they have a degree. All else is left to
experience.

3. ANALOGIES OF EXPERIENCE.

The principle of these is: Experience is possible only through the
representation of a necessary connection of Perceptions.

PROOF.

Experience is an empirical cognition; that is to say, a cognition which
determines an object by means of perceptions. It is therefore a
synthesis of perceptions, a synthesis which is not itself contained in
perception, but which contains the synthetical unity of the manifold of
perception in a consciousness; and this unity constitutes the essential
of our cognition of objects of the senses, that is, of experience (not
merely of intuition or sensation). Now in experience our perceptions
come together contingently, so that no character of necessity in their
connection appears, or can appear from the perceptions themselves,
because apprehension is only a placing together of the manifold of
empirical intuition, and no representation of a necessity in the
connected existence of the phenomena which apprehension brings
together, is to be discovered therein. But as experience is a cognition
of objects by means of perceptions, it follows that the relation of the
existence of the existence of the manifold must be represented in
experience not as it is put together in time, but as it is objectively
in time. And as time itself cannot be perceived, the determination of
the existence of objects in time can only take place by means of their
connection in time in general, consequently only by means of à priori
connecting conceptions. Now as these conceptions always possess the
character of necessity, experience is possible only by means of a
representation of the necessary connection of perception.

The three modi of time are permanence, succession, and coexistence.
Accordingly, there are three rules of all relations of time in
phenomena, according to which the existence of every phenomenon is
determined in respect of the unity of all time, and these antecede all
experience and render it possible.

The general principle of all three analogies rests on the necessary
unity of apperception in relation to all possible empirical
consciousness (perception) at every time, consequently, as this unity
lies à priori at the foundation of all mental operations, the principle
rests on the synthetical unity of all phenomena according to their
relation in time. For the original apperception relates to our internal
sense (the complex of all representations), and indeed relates à priori
to its form, that is to say, the relation of the manifold empirical
consciousness in time. Now this manifold must be combined in original
apperception according to relations of time—a necessity imposed by the
à priori transcendental unity of apperception, to which is subjected
all that can belong to my (i.e., my own) cognition, and therefore all
that can become an object for me. This synthetical and à priori
determined unity in relation of perceptions in time is therefore the
rule: “All empirical determinations of time must be subject to rules of
the general determination of time”; and the analogies of experience, of
which we are now about to treat, must be rules of this nature.

These principles have this peculiarity, that they do not concern
phenomena, and the synthesis of the empirical intuition thereof, but
merely the existence of phenomena and their relation to each other in
regard to this existence. Now the mode in which we apprehend a thing in
a phenomenon can be determined à priori in such a manner that the rule
of its synthesis can give, that is to say, can produce this à priori
intuition in every empirical example. But the existence of phenomena
cannot be known à priori, and although we could arrive by this path at
a conclusion of the fact of some existence, we could not cognize that
existence determinately, that is to say, we should be incapable of
anticipating in what respect the empirical intuition of it would be
distinguishable from that of others.

The two principles above mentioned, which I called mathematical, in
consideration of the fact of their authorizing the application of
mathematic phenomena, relate to these phenomena only in regard to their
possibility, and instruct us how phenomena, as far as regards their
intuition or the real in their perception, can be generated according
to the rules of a mathematical synthesis. Consequently, numerical
quantities, and with them the determination of a phenomenon as a
quantity, can be employed in the one case as well as in the other.
Thus, for example, out of 200,000 illuminations by the moon, I might
compose and give à priori, that is construct, the degree of our
sensations of the sun-light.[30] We may therefore entitle these two
principles constitutive.

 [30] Kant’s meaning is: The two principles enunciated under the heads
 of “Axioms of Intuition,” and “Anticipations of Perception,” authorize
 the application to phenomena of determinations of size and number,
 that is of mathematic. For example, I may compute the light of the
 sun, and say that its quantity is a certain number of times greater
 than that of the moon. In the same way, heat is measured by the
 comparison of its different effects on water, &c., and on mercury in a
 thermometer.—Tr

The case is very different with those principles whose province it is
to subject the existence of phenomena to rules à priori. For as
existence does not admit of being constructed, it is clear that they
must only concern the relations of existence and be merely regulative
principles. In this case, therefore, neither axioms nor anticipations
are to be thought of. Thus, if a perception is given us, in a certain
relation of time to other (although undetermined) perceptions, we
cannot then say à priori, what and how great (in quantity) the other
perception necessarily connected with the former is, but only how it is
connected, quoad its existence, in this given modus of time. Analogies
in philosophy mean something very different from that which they
represent in mathematics. In the latter they are formulae, which
enounce the equality of two relations of quantity, and are always
constitutive, so that if two terms of the proportion are given, the
third is also given, that is, can be constructed by the aid of these
formulae. But in philosophy, analogy is not the equality of two
quantitative but of two qualitative relations. In this case, from three
given terms, I can give à priori and cognize the relation to a fourth
member, but not this fourth term itself, although I certainly possess a
rule to guide me in the search for this fourth term in experience, and
a mark to assist me in discovering it. An analogy of experience is
therefore only a rule according to which unity of experience must arise
out of perceptions in respect to objects (phenomena) not as a
constitutive, but merely as a regulative principle. The same holds good
also of the postulates of empirical thought in general, which relate to
the synthesis of mere intuition (which concerns the form of phenomena),
the synthesis of perception (which concerns the matter of phenomena),
and the synthesis of experience (which concerns the relation of these
perceptions). For they are only regulative principles, and clearly
distinguishable from the mathematical, which are constitutive, not
indeed in regard to the certainty which both possess à priori, but in
the mode of evidence thereof, consequently also in the manner of
demonstration.

But what has been observed of all synthetical propositions, and must be
particularly remarked in this place, is this, that these analogies
possess significance and validity, not as principles of the
transcendental, but only as principles of the empirical use of the
understanding, and their truth can therefore be proved only as such,
and that consequently the phenomena must not be subjoined directly
under the categories, but only under their schemata. For if the objects
to which those principles must be applied were things in themselves, it
would be quite impossible to cognize aught concerning them
synthetically à priori. But they are nothing but phenomena; a complete
knowledge of which—a knowledge to which all principles à priori must at
last relate—is the only possible experience. It follows that these
principles can have nothing else for their aim than the conditions of
the empirical cognition in the unity of synthesis of phenomena. But
this synthesis is cogitated only in the schema of the pure conception
of the understanding, of whose unity, as that of a synthesis in
general, the category contains the function unrestricted by any
sensuous condition. These principles will therefore authorize us to
connect phenomena according to an analogy, with the logical and
universal unity of conceptions, and consequently to employ the
categories in the principles themselves; but in the application of them
to experience, we shall use only their schemata, as the key to their
proper application, instead of the categories, or rather the latter as
restricting conditions, under the title of “formulae” of the former.

A. FIRST ANALOGY.

Principle of the Permanence of Substance.

In all changes of phenomena, substance is permanent, and the quantum
thereof in nature is neither increased nor diminished.

PROOF.

All phenomena exist in time, wherein alone as substratum, that is, as
the permanent form of the internal intuition, coexistence and
succession can be represented. Consequently time, in which all changes
of phenomena must be cogitated, remains and changes not, because it is
that in which succession and coexistence can be represented only as
determinations thereof. Now, time in itself cannot be an object of
perception. It follows that in objects of perception, that is, in
phenomena, there must be found a substratum which represents time in
general, and in which all change or coexistence can be perceived by
means of the relation of phenomena to it. But the substratum of all
reality, that is, of all that pertains to the existence of things, is
substance; all that pertains to existence can be cogitated only as a
determination of substance. Consequently, the permanent, in relation to
which alone can all relations of time in phenomena be determined, is
substance in the world of phenomena, that is, the real in phenomena,
that which, as the substratum of all change, remains ever the same.
Accordingly, as this cannot change in existence, its quantity in nature
can neither be increased nor diminished.

Our apprehension of the manifold in a phenomenon is always successive,
is Consequently always changing. By it alone we could, therefore, never
determine whether this manifold, as an object of experience, is
coexistent or successive, unless it had for a foundation something
fixed and permanent, of the existence of which all succession and
coexistence are nothing but so many modes (modi of time). Only in the
permanent, then, are relations of time possible (for simultaneity and
succession are the only relations in time); that is to say, the
permanent is the substratum of our empirical representation of time
itself, in which alone all determination of time is possible.
Permanence is, in fact, just another expression for time, as the
abiding correlate of all existence of phenomena, and of all change, and
of all coexistence. For change does not affect time itself, but only
the phenomena in time (just as coexistence cannot be regarded as a
modus of time itself, seeing that in time no parts are coexistent, but
all successive). If we were to attribute succession to time itself, we
should be obliged to cogitate another time, in which this succession
would be possible. It is only by means of the permanent that existence
in different parts of the successive series of time receives a
quantity, which we entitle duration. For in mere succession, existence
is perpetually vanishing and recommencing, and therefore never has even
the least quantity. Without the permanent, then, no relation in time is
possible. Now, time in itself is not an object of perception;
consequently the permanent in phenomena must be regarded as the
substratum of all determination of time, and consequently also as the
condition of the possibility of all synthetical unity of perceptions,
that is, of experience; and all existence and all change in time can
only be regarded as a mode in the existence of that which abides
unchangeably. Therefore, in all phenomena, the permanent is the object
in itself, that is, the substance (phenomenon); but all that changes or
can change belongs only to the mode of the existence of this substance
or substances, consequently to its determinations.

I find that in all ages not only the philosopher, but even the common
understanding, has preposited this permanence as a substratum of all
change in phenomena; indeed, I am compelled to believe that they will
always accept this as an indubitable fact. Only the philosopher
expresses himself in a more precise and definite manner, when he says:
“In all changes in the world, the substance remains, and the accidents
alone are changeable.” But of this decidedly synthetical proposition, I
nowhere meet with even an attempt at proof; nay, it very rarely has the
good fortune to stand, as it deserves to do, at the head of the pure
and entirely à priori laws of nature. In truth, the statement that
substance is permanent, is tautological. For this very permanence is
the ground on which we apply the category of substance to the
phenomenon; and we should have been obliged to prove that in all
phenomena there is something permanent, of the existence of which the
changeable is nothing but a determination. But because a proof of this
nature cannot be dogmatical, that is, cannot be drawn from conceptions,
inasmuch as it concerns a synthetical proposition à priori, and as
philosophers never reflected that such propositions are valid only in
relation to possible experience, and therefore cannot be proved except
by means of a deduction of the possibility of experience, it is no
wonder that while it has served as the foundation of all experience
(for we feel the need of it in empirical cognition), it has never been
supported by proof.

A philosopher was asked: “What is the weight of smoke?” He answered:
“Subtract from the weight of the burnt wood the weight of the remaining
ashes, and you will have the weight of the smoke.” Thus he presumed it
to be incontrovertible that even in fire the matter (substance) does
not perish, but that only the form of it undergoes a change. In like
manner was the saying: “From nothing comes nothing,” only another
inference from the principle or permanence, or rather of the
ever-abiding existence of the true subject in phenomena. For if that in
the phenomenon which we call substance is to be the proper substratum
of all determination of time, it follows that all existence in past as
well as in future time, must be determinable by means of it alone.
Hence we are entitled to apply the term substance to a phenomenon, only
because we suppose its existence in all time, a notion which the word
permanence does not fully express, as it seems rather to be referable
to future time. However, the internal necessity perpetually to be, is
inseparably connected with the necessity always to have been, and so
the expression may stand as it is. “Gigni de nihilo nihil; in nihilum
nil posse reverti,”[31] are two propositions which the ancients never
parted, and which people nowadays sometimes mistakenly disjoin, because
they imagine that the propositions apply to objects as things in
themselves, and that the former might be inimical to the dependence
(even in respect of its substance also) of the world upon a supreme
cause. But this apprehension is entirely needless, for the question in
this case is only of phenomena in the sphere of experience, the unity
of which never could be possible, if we admitted the possibility that
new things (in respect of their substance) should arise. For in that
case, we should lose altogether that which alone can represent the
unity of time, to wit, the identity of the substratum, as that through
which alone all change possesses complete and thorough unity. This
permanence is, however, nothing but the manner in which we represent to
ourselves the existence of things in the phenomenal world.

 [31] Persius, Satirae, iii.83-84.

The determinations of a substance, which are only particular modes of
its existence, are called accidents. They are always real, because they
concern the existence of substance (negations are only determinations,
which express the non-existence of something in the substance). Now, if
to this real in the substance we ascribe a particular existence (for
example, to motion as an accident of matter), this existence is called
inherence, in contradistinction to the existence of substance, which we
call subsistence. But hence arise many misconceptions, and it would be
a more accurate and just mode of expression to designate the accident
only as the mode in which the existence of a substance is positively
determined. Meanwhile, by reason of the conditions of the logical
exercise of our understanding, it is impossible to avoid separating, as
it were, that which in the existence of a substance is subject to
change, whilst the substance remains, and regarding it in relation to
that which is properly permanent and radical. On this account, this
category of substance stands under the title of relation, rather
because it is the condition thereof than because it contains in itself
any relation.

Now, upon this notion of permanence rests the proper notion of the
conception change. Origin and extinction are not changes of that which
originates or becomes extinct. Change is but a mode of existence, which
follows on another mode of existence of the same object; hence all that
changes is permanent, and only the condition thereof changes. Now since
this mutation affects only determinations, which can have a beginning
or an end, we may say, employing an expression which seems somewhat
paradoxical: “Only the permanent (substance) is subject to change; the
mutable suffers no change, but rather alternation, that is, when
certain determinations cease, others begin.”

Change, when, cannot be perceived by us except in substances, and
origin or extinction in an absolute sense, that does not concern merely
a determination of the permanent, cannot be a possible perception, for
it is this very notion of the permanent which renders possible the
representation of a transition from one state into another, and from
non-being to being, which, consequently, can be empirically cognized
only as alternating determinations of that which is permanent. Grant
that a thing absolutely begins to be; we must then have a point of time
in which it was not. But how and by what can we fix and determine this
point of time, unless by that which already exists? For a void
time—preceding—is not an object of perception; but if we connect this
beginning with objects which existed previously, and which continue to
exist till the object in question in question begins to be, then the
latter can only be a determination of the former as the permanent. The
same holds good of the notion of extinction, for this presupposes the
empirical representation of a time, in which a phenomenon no longer
exists.

Substances (in the world of phenomena) are the substratum of all
determinations of time. The beginning of some, and the ceasing to be of
other substances, would utterly do away with the only condition of the
empirical unity of time; and in that case phenomena would relate to two
different times, in which, side by side, existence would pass; which is
absurd. For there is only one time in which all different times must be
placed, not as coexistent, but as successive.

Accordingly, permanence is a necessary condition under which alone
phenomena, as things or objects, are determinable in a possible
experience. But as regards the empirical criterion of this necessary
permanence, and with it of the substantiality of phenomena, we shall
find sufficient opportunity to speak in the sequel.

B. SECOND ANALOGY.

Principle of the Succession of Time According to the Law of Causality.
All changes take place according to the law of the connection of Cause
and Effect.

PROOF.

(That all phenomena in the succession of time are only changes, that
is, a successive being and non-being of the determinations of
substance, which is permanent; consequently that a being of substance
itself which follows on the non-being thereof, or a non-being of
substance which follows on the being thereof, in other words, that the
origin or extinction of substance itself, is impossible—all this has
been fully established in treating of the foregoing principle. This
principle might have been expressed as follows: “All alteration
(succession) of phenomena is merely change”; for the changes of
substance are not origin or extinction, because the conception of
change presupposes the same subject as existing with two opposite
determinations, and consequently as permanent. After this premonition,
we shall proceed to the proof.)

I perceive that phenomena succeed one another, that is to say, a state
of things exists at one time, the opposite of which existed in a former
state. In this case, then, I really connect together two perceptions in
time. Now connection is not an operation of mere sense and intuition,
but is the product of a synthetical faculty of imagination, which
determines the internal sense in respect of a relation of time. But
imagination can connect these two states in two ways, so that either
the one or the other may antecede in time; for time in itself cannot be
an object of perception, and what in an object precedes and what
follows cannot be empirically determined in relation to it. I am only
conscious, then, that my imagination places one state before and the
other after; not that the one state antecedes the other in the object.
In other words, the objective relation of the successive phenomena
remains quite undetermined by means of mere perception. Now in order
that this relation may be cognized as determined, the relation between
the two states must be so cogitated that it is thereby determined as
necessary, which of them must be placed before and which after, and not
conversely. But the conception which carries with it a necessity of
synthetical unity, can be none other than a pure conception of the
understanding which does not lie in mere perception; and in this case
it is the conception of “the relation of cause and effect,” the former
of which determines the latter in time, as its necessary consequence,
and not as something which might possibly antecede (or which might in
some cases not be perceived to follow). It follows that it is only
because we subject the sequence of phenomena, and consequently all
change, to the law of causality, that experience itself, that is,
empirical cognition of phenomena, becomes possible; and consequently,
that phenomena themselves, as objects of experience, are possible only
by virtue of this law.

Our apprehension of the manifold of phenomena is always successive. The
representations of parts succeed one another. Whether they succeed one
another in the object also, is a second point for reflection, which was
not contained in the former. Now we may certainly give the name of
object to everything, even to every representation, so far as we are
conscious thereof; but what this word may mean in the case of
phenomena, not merely in so far as they (as representations) are
objects, but only in so far as they indicate an object, is a question
requiring deeper consideration. In so far as they, regarded merely as
representations, are at the same time objects of consciousness, they
are not to be distinguished from apprehension, that is, reception into
the synthesis of imagination, and we must therefore say: “The manifold
of phenomena is always produced successively in the mind.” If phenomena
were things in themselves, no man would be able to conjecture from the
succession of our representations how this manifold is connected in the
object; for we have to do only with our representations. How things may
be in themselves, without regard to the representations through which
they affect us, is utterly beyond the sphere of our cognition. Now
although phenomena are not things in themselves, and are nevertheless
the only thing given to us to be cognized, it is my duty to show what
sort of connection in time belongs to the manifold in phenomena
themselves, while the representation of this manifold in apprehension
is always successive. For example, the apprehension of the manifold in
the phenomenon of a house which stands before me, is successive. Now
comes the question whether the manifold of this house is in itself
successive—which no one will be at all willing to grant. But, so soon
as I raise my conception of an object to the transcendental
signification thereof, I find that the house is not a thing in itself,
but only a phenomenon, that is, a representation, the transcendental
object of which remains utterly unknown. What then am I to understand
by the question: “How can the manifold be connected in the phenomenon
itself—not considered as a thing in itself, but merely as a
phenomenon?” Here that which lies in my successive apprehension is
regarded as representation, whilst the phenomenon which is given me,
notwithstanding that it is nothing more than a complex of these
representations, is regarded as the object thereof, with which my
conception, drawn from the representations of apprehension, must
harmonize. It is very soon seen that, as accordance of the cognition
with its object constitutes truth, the question now before us can only
relate to the formal conditions of empirical truth; and that the
phenomenon, in opposition to the representations of apprehension, can
only be distinguished therefrom as the object of them, if it is subject
to a rule which distinguishes it from every other apprehension, and
which renders necessary a mode of connection of the manifold. That in
the phenomenon which contains the condition of this necessary rule of
apprehension, is the object.

Let us now proceed to our task. That something happens, that is to say,
that something or some state exists which before was not, cannot be
empirically perceived, unless a phenomenon precedes, which does not
contain in itself this state. For a reality which should follow upon a
void time, in other words, a beginning, which no state of things
precedes, can just as little be apprehended as the void time itself.
Every apprehension of an event is therefore a perception which follows
upon another perception. But as this is the case with all synthesis of
apprehension, as I have shown above in the example of a house, my
apprehension of an event is not yet sufficiently distinguished from
other apprehensions. But I remark also that if in a phenomenon which
contains an occurrence, I call the antecedent state of my perception,
A, and the following state, B, the perception B can only follow A in
apprehension, and the perception A cannot follow B, but only precede
it. For example, I see a ship float down the stream of a river. My
perception of its place lower down follows upon my perception of its
place higher up the course of the river, and it is impossible that, in
the apprehension of this phenomenon, the vessel should be perceived
first below and afterwards higher up the stream. Here, therefore, the
order in the sequence of perceptions in apprehension is determined; and
by this order apprehension is regulated. In the former example, my
perceptions in the apprehension of a house might begin at the roof and
end at the foundation, or vice versa; or I might apprehend the manifold
in this empirical intuition, by going from left to right, and from
right to left. Accordingly, in the series of these perceptions, there
was no determined order, which necessitated my beginning at a certain
point, in order empirically to connect the manifold. But this rule is
always to be met with in the perception of that which happens, and it
makes the order of the successive perceptions in the apprehension of
such a phenomenon necessary.

I must, therefore, in the present case, deduce the subjective sequence
of apprehension from the objective sequence of phenomena, for otherwise
the former is quite undetermined, and one phenomenon is not
distinguishable from another. The former alone proves nothing as to the
connection of the manifold in an object, for it is quite arbitrary. The
latter must consist in the order of the manifold in a phenomenon,
according to which order the apprehension of one thing (that which
happens) follows that of another thing (which precedes), in conformity
with a rule. In this way alone can I be authorized to say of the
phenomenon itself, and not merely of my own apprehension, that a
certain order or sequence is to be found therein. That is, in other
words, I cannot arrange my apprehension otherwise than in this order.

In conformity with this rule, then, it is necessary that in that which
antecedes an event there be found the condition of a rule, according to
which in this event follows always and necessarily; but I cannot
reverse this and go back from the event, and determine (by
apprehension) that which antecedes it. For no phenomenon goes back from
the succeeding point of time to the preceding point, although it does
certainly relate to a preceding point of time; from a given time, on
the other hand, there is always a necessary progression to the
determined succeeding time. Therefore, because there certainly is
something that follows, I must of necessity connect it with something
else, which antecedes, and upon which it follows, in conformity with a
rule, that is necessarily, so that the event, as conditioned, affords
certain indication of a condition, and this condition determines the
event.

Let us suppose that nothing precedes an event, upon which this event
must follow in conformity with a rule. All sequence of perception would
then exist only in apprehension, that is to say, would be merely
subjective, and it could not thereby be objectively determined what
thing ought to precede, and what ought to follow in perception. In such
a case, we should have nothing but a play of representations, which
would possess no application to any object. That is to say, it would
not be possible through perception to distinguish one phenomenon from
another, as regards relations of time; because the succession in the
act of apprehension would always be of the same sort, and therefore
there would be nothing in the phenomenon to determine the succession,
and to render a certain sequence objectively necessary. And, in this
case, I cannot say that two states in a phenomenon follow one upon the
other, but only that one apprehension follows upon another. But this is
merely subjective, and does not determine an object, and consequently
cannot be held to be cognition of an object—not even in the phenomenal
world.

Accordingly, when we know in experience that something happens, we
always presuppose that something precedes, whereupon it follows in
conformity with a rule. For otherwise I could not say of the object
that it follows; because the mere succession in my apprehension, if it
be not determined by a rule in relation to something preceding, does
not authorize succession in the object. Only, therefore, in reference
to a rule, according to which phenomena are determined in their
sequence, that is, as they happen, by the preceding state, can I make
my subjective synthesis (of apprehension) objective, and it is only
under this presupposition that even the experience of an event is
possible.

No doubt it appears as if this were in thorough contradiction to all
the notions which people have hitherto entertained in regard to the
procedure of the human understanding. According to these opinions, it
is by means of the perception and comparison of similar consequences
following upon certain antecedent phenomena that the understanding is
led to the discovery of a rule, according to which certain events
always follow certain phenomena, and it is only by this process that we
attain to the conception of cause. Upon such a basis, it is clear that
this conception must be merely empirical, and the rule which it
furnishes us with—“Everything that happens must have a cause”—would be
just as contingent as experience itself. The universality and necessity
of the rule or law would be perfectly spurious attributes of it.
Indeed, it could not possess universal validity, inasmuch as it would
not in this case be à priori, but founded on deduction. But the same is
the case with this law as with other pure à priori representations
(e.g., space and time), which we can draw in perfect clearness and
completeness from experience, only because we had already placed them
therein, and by that means, and by that alone, had rendered experience
possible. Indeed, the logical clearness of this representation of a
rule, determining the series of events, is possible only when we have
made use thereof in experience. Nevertheless, the recognition of this
rule, as a condition of the synthetical unity of phenomena in time, was
the ground of experience itself and consequently preceded it à priori.

It is now our duty to show by an example that we never, even in
experience, attribute to an object the notion of succession or effect
(of an event—that is, the happening of something that did not exist
before), and distinguish it from the subjective succession of
apprehension, unless when a rule lies at the foundation, which compels
us to observe this order of perception in preference to any other, and
that, indeed, it is this necessity which first renders possible the
representation of a succession in the object.

We have representations within us, of which also we can be conscious.
But, however widely extended, however accurate and thoroughgoing this
consciousness may be, these representations are still nothing more than
representations, that is, internal determinations of the mind in this
or that relation of time. Now how happens it that to these
representations we should set an object, or that, in addition to their
subjective reality, as modifications, we should still further attribute
to them a certain unknown objective reality? It is clear that objective
significancy cannot consist in a relation to another representation (of
that which we desire to term object), for in that case the question
again arises: “How does this other representation go out of itself, and
obtain objective significancy over and above the subjective, which is
proper to it, as a determination of a state of mind?” If we try to
discover what sort of new property the relation to an object gives to
our subjective representations, and what new importance they thereby
receive, we shall find that this relation has no other effect than that
of rendering necessary the connection of our representations in a
certain manner, and of subjecting them to a rule; and that conversely,
it is only because a certain order is necessary in the relations of
time of our representations, that objective significancy is ascribed to
them.

In the synthesis of phenomena, the manifold of our representations is
always successive. Now hereby is not represented an object, for by
means of this succession, which is common to all apprehension, no one
thing is distinguished from another. But so soon as I perceive or
assume that in this succession there is a relation to a state
antecedent, from which the representation follows in accordance with a
rule, so soon do I represent something as an event, or as a thing that
happens; in other words, I cognize an object to which I must assign a
certain determinate position in time, which cannot be altered, because
of the preceding state in the object. When, therefore, I perceive that
something happens, there is contained in this representation, in the
first place, the fact, that something antecedes; because, it is only in
relation to this that the phenomenon obtains its proper relation of
time, in other words, exists after an antecedent time, in which it did
not exist. But it can receive its determined place in time only by the
presupposition that something existed in the foregoing state, upon
which it follows inevitably and always, that is, in conformity with a
rule. From all this it is evident that, in the first place, I cannot
reverse the order of succession, and make that which happens precede
that upon which it follows; and that, in the second place, if the
antecedent state be posited, a certain determinate event inevitably and
necessarily follows. Hence it follows that there exists a certain order
in our representations, whereby the present gives a sure indication of
some previously existing state, as a correlate, though still
undetermined, of the existing event which is given—a correlate which
itself relates to the event as its consequence, conditions it, and
connects it necessarily with itself in the series of time.

If then it be admitted as a necessary law of sensibility, and
consequently a formal condition of all perception, that the preceding
necessarily determines the succeeding time (inasmuch as I cannot arrive
at the succeeding except through the preceding), it must likewise be an
indispensable law of empirical representation of the series of time
that the phenomena of the past determine all phenomena in the
succeeding time, and that the latter, as events, cannot take place,
except in so far as the former determine their existence in time, that
is to say, establish it according to a rule. For it is of course only
in phenomena that we can empirically cognize this continuity in the
connection of times.

For all experience and for the possibility of experience, understanding
is indispensable, and the first step which it takes in this sphere is
not to render the representation of objects clear, but to render the
representation of an object in general, possible. It does this by
applying the order of time to phenomena, and their existence. In other
words, it assigns to each phenomenon, as a consequence, a place in
relation to preceding phenomena, determined à priori in time, without
which it could not harmonize with time itself, which determines a place
à priori to all its parts. This determination of place cannot be
derived from the relation of phenomena to absolute time (for it is not
an object of perception); but, on the contrary, phenomena must
reciprocally determine the places in time of one another, and render
these necessary in the order of time. In other words, whatever follows
or happens, must follow in conformity with a universal rule upon that
which was contained in the foregoing state. Hence arises a series of
phenomena, which, by means of the understanding, produces and renders
necessary exactly the same order and continuous connection in the
series of our possible perceptions, as is found à priori in the form of
internal intuition (time), in which all our perceptions must have
place.

That something happens, then, is a perception which belongs to a
possible experience, which becomes real only because I look upon the
phenomenon as determined in regard to its place in time, consequently
as an object, which can always be found by means of a rule in the
connected series of my perceptions. But this rule of the determination
of a thing according to succession in time is as follows: “In what
precedes may be found the condition, under which an event always (that
is, necessarily) follows.” From all this it is obvious that the
principle of cause and effect is the principle of possible experience,
that is, of objective cognition of phenomena, in regard to their
relations in the succession of time.

The proof of this fundamental proposition rests entirely on the
following momenta of argument. To all empirical cognition belongs the
synthesis of the manifold by the imagination, a synthesis which is
always successive, that is, in which the representations therein always
follow one another. But the order of succession in imagination is not
determined, and the series of successive representations may be taken
retrogressively as well as progressively. But if this synthesis is a
synthesis of apprehension (of the manifold of a given phenomenon), then
the order is determined in the object, or to speak more accurately,
there is therein an order of successive synthesis which determines an
object, and according to which something necessarily precedes, and when
this is posited, something else necessarily follows. If, then, my
perception is to contain the cognition of an event, that is, of
something which really happens, it must be an empirical judgement,
wherein we think that the succession is determined; that is, it
presupposes another phenomenon, upon which this event follows
necessarily, or in conformity with a rule. If, on the contrary, when I
posited the antecedent, the event did not necessarily follow, I should
be obliged to consider it merely as a subjective play of my
imagination, and if in this I represented to myself anything as
objective, I must look upon it as a mere dream. Thus, the relation of
phenomena (as possible perceptions), according to which that which
happens is, as to its existence, necessarily determined in time by
something which antecedes, in conformity with a rule—in other words,
the relation of cause and effect—is the condition of the objective
validity of our empirical judgements in regard to the sequence of
perceptions, consequently of their empirical truth, and therefore of
experience. The principle of the relation of causality in the
succession of phenomena is therefore valid for all objects of
experience, because it is itself the ground of the possibility of
experience.

Here, however, a difficulty arises, which must be resolved. The
principle of the connection of causality among phenomena is limited in
our formula to the succession thereof, although in practice we find
that the principle applies also when the phenomena exist together in
the same time, and that cause and effect may be simultaneous. For
example, there is heat in a room, which does not exist in the open air.
I look about for the cause, and find it to be the fire, Now the fire as
the cause is simultaneous with its effect, the heat of the room. In
this case, then, there is no succession as regards time, between cause
and effect, but they are simultaneous; and still the law holds good.
The greater part of operating causes in nature are simultaneous with
their effects, and the succession in time of the latter is produced
only because the cause cannot achieve the total of its effect in one
moment. But at the moment when the effect first arises, it is always
simultaneous with the causality of its cause, because, if the cause had
but a moment before ceased to be, the effect could not have arisen.
Here it must be specially remembered that we must consider the order of
time and not the lapse thereof. The relation remains, even though no
time has elapsed. The time between the causality of the cause and its
immediate effect may entirely vanish, and the cause and effect be thus
simultaneous, but the relation of the one to the other remains always
determinable according to time. If, for example, I consider a leaden
ball, which lies upon a cushion and makes a hollow in it, as a cause,
then it is simultaneous with the effect. But I distinguish the two
through the relation of time of the dynamical connection of both. For
if I lay the ball upon the cushion, then the hollow follows upon the
before smooth surface; but supposing the cushion has, from some cause
or another, a hollow, there does not thereupon follow a leaden ball.

Thus, the law of succession of time is in all instances the only
empirical criterion of effect in relation to the causality of the
antecedent cause. The glass is the cause of the rising of the water
above its horizontal surface, although the two phenomena are
contemporaneous. For, as soon as I draw some water with the glass from
a larger vessel, an effect follows thereupon, namely, the change of the
horizontal state which the water had in the large vessel into a
concave, which it assumes in the glass.

This conception of causality leads us to the conception of action; that
of action, to the conception of force; and through it, to the
conception of substance. As I do not wish this critical essay, the sole
purpose of which is to treat of the sources of our synthetical
cognition à priori, to be crowded with analyses which merely explain,
but do not enlarge the sphere of our conceptions, I reserve the
detailed explanation of the above conceptions for a future system of
pure reason. Such an analysis, indeed, executed with great
particularity, may already be found in well-known works on this
subject. But I cannot at present refrain from making a few remarks on
the empirical criterion of a substance, in so far as it seems to be
more evident and more easily recognized through the conception of
action than through that of the permanence of a phenomenon.

Where action (consequently activity and force) exists, substance also
must exist, and in it alone must be sought the seat of that fruitful
source of phenomena. Very well. But if we are called upon to explain
what we mean by substance, and wish to avoid the vice of reasoning in a
circle, the answer is by no means so easy. How shall we conclude
immediately from the action to the permanence of that which acts, this
being nevertheless an essential and peculiar criterion of substance
(phenomenon)? But after what has been said above, the solution of this
question becomes easy enough, although by the common mode of
procedure—merely analysing our conceptions—it would be quite
impossible. The conception of action indicates the relation of the
subject of causality to the effect. Now because all effect consists in
that which happens, therefore in the changeable, the last subject
thereof is the permanent, as the substratum of all that changes, that
is, substance. For according to the principle of causality, actions are
always the first ground of all change in phenomena and, consequently,
cannot be a property of a subject which itself changes, because if this
were the case, other actions and another subject would be necessary to
determine this change. From all this it results that action alone, as
an empirical criterion, is a sufficient proof of the presence of
substantiality, without any necessity on my part of endeavouring to
discover the permanence of substance by a comparison. Besides, by this
mode of induction we could not attain to the completeness which the
magnitude and strict universality of the conception requires. For that
the primary subject of the causality of all arising and passing away,
all origin and extinction, cannot itself (in the sphere of phenomena)
arise and pass away, is a sound and safe conclusion, a conclusion which
leads us to the conception of empirical necessity and permanence in
existence, and consequently to the conception of a substance as
phenomenon.

When something happens, the mere fact of the occurrence, without regard
to that which occurs, is an object requiring investigation. The
transition from the non-being of a state into the existence of it,
supposing that this state contains no quality which previously existed
in the phenomenon, is a fact of itself demanding inquiry. Such an
event, as has been shown in No. A, does not concern substance (for
substance does not thus originate), but its condition or state. It is
therefore only change, and not origin from nothing. If this origin be
regarded as the effect of a foreign cause, it is termed creation, which
cannot be admitted as an event among phenomena, because the very
possibility of it would annihilate the unity of experience. If,
however, I regard all things not as phenomena, but as things in
themselves and objects of understanding alone, they, although
substances, may be considered as dependent, in respect of their
existence, on a foreign cause. But this would require a very different
meaning in the words, a meaning which could not apply to phenomena as
objects of possible experience.

How a thing can be changed, how it is possible that upon one state
existing in one point of time, an opposite state should follow in
another point of time—of this we have not the smallest conception à
priori. There is requisite for this the knowledge of real powers, which
can only be given empirically; for example, knowledge of moving forces,
or, in other words, of certain successive phenomena (as movements)
which indicate the presence of such forces. But the form of every
change, the condition under which alone it can take place as the coming
into existence of another state (be the content of the change, that is,
the state which is changed, what it may), and consequently the
succession of the states themselves can very well be considered à
priori, in relation to the law of causality and the conditions of
time.[32]

 [32] It must be remarked that I do not speak of the change of certain
 relations, but of the change of the state. Thus, when a body moves in
 a uniform manner, it does not change its state (of motion); but only
 when all motion increases or decreases.

When a substance passes from one state, a, into another state, b, the
point of time in which the latter exists is different from, and
subsequent to that in which the former existed. In like manner, the
second state, as reality (in the phenomenon), differs from the first,
in which the reality of the second did not exist, as b from zero. That
is to say, if the state, b, differs from the state, a, only in respect
to quantity, the change is a coming into existence of b -a, which in
the former state did not exist, and in relation to which that state is
= O.

Now the question arises how a thing passes from one state = a, into
another state = b. Between two moments there is always a certain time,
and between two states existing in these moments there is always a
difference having a certain quantity (for all parts of phenomena are
in their turn quantities). Consequently, every transition from one
state into another, is always effected in a time contained between
two moments, of which the first determines the state which the thing
leaves, and the second determines the state into which the thing
passes. Both moments, then, are limitations of the time of a change,
consequently of the intermediate state between both, and as such they
belong to the total of the change. Now every change has a cause, which
evidences its causality in the whole time during which the charge takes
place. The cause, therefore, does not produce the change all at once or
in one moment, but in a time, so that, as the time gradually increases
from the commencing instant, a, to its completion at b, in like manner
also, the quantity of the reality (b - a) is generated through the
lesser degrees which are contained between the first and last. All
change is therefore possible only through a continuous action of the
causality, which, in so far as it is uniform, we call a momentum. The
change does not consist of these momenta, but is generated or produced
by them as their effect.

Such is the law of the continuity of all change, the ground of which is
that neither time itself nor any phenomenon in time consists of parts
which are the smallest possible, but that, notwithstanding, the state
of a thing passes in the process of a change through all these parts,
as elements, to its second state. There is no smallest degree of
reality in a phenomenon, just as there is no smallest degree in the
quantity of time; and so the new state of reality grows up out of the
former state, through all the infinite degrees thereof, the differences
of which one from another, taken all together, are less than the
difference between 0 and a.

It is not our business to inquire here into the utility of this
principle in the investigation of nature. But how such a proposition,
which appears so greatly to extend our knowledge of nature, is possible
completely à priori, is indeed a question which deserves investigation,
although the first view seems to demonstrate the truth and reality of
the principle, and the question, how it is possible, may be considered
superfluous. For there are so many groundless pretensions to the
enlargement of our knowledge by pure reason that we must take it as a
general rule to be mistrustful of all such, and without a thoroughgoing
and radical deduction, to believe nothing of the sort even on the
clearest dogmatical evidence.

Every addition to our empirical knowledge, and every advance made in
the exercise of our perception, is nothing more than an extension of
the determination of the internal sense, that is to say, a progression
in time, be objects themselves what they may, phenomena, or pure
intuitions. This progression in time determines everything, and is
itself determined by nothing else. That is to say, the parts of the
progression exist only in time, and by means of the synthesis thereof,
and are not given antecedently to it. For this reason, every transition
in perception to anything which follows upon another in time, is a
determination of time by means of the production of this perception.
And as this determination of time is, always and in all its parts, a
quantity, the perception produced is to be considered as a quantity
which proceeds through all its degrees—no one of which is the smallest
possible—from zero up to its determined degree. From this we perceive
the possibility of cognizing à priori a law of changes—a law, however,
which concerns their form merely. We merely anticipate our own
apprehension, the formal condition of which, inasmuch as it is itself
to be found in the mind antecedently to all given phenomena, must
certainly be capable of being cognized à priori.

Thus, as time contains the sensuous condition à priori of the
possibility of a continuous progression of that which exists to that
which follows it, the understanding, by virtue of the unity of
apperception, contains the condition à priori of the possibility of a
continuous determination of the position in time of all phenomena, and
this by means of the series of causes and effects, the former of which
necessitate the sequence of the latter, and thereby render universally
and for all time, and by consequence, objectively, valid the empirical
cognition of the relations of time.

C. THIRD ANALOGY.

Principle of Coexistence, According to the Law of Reciprocity or
Community.

All substances, in so far as they can be perceived in space at the same
time, exist in a state of complete reciprocity of action.

PROOF.

Things are coexistent, when in empirical intuition the perception of
the one can follow upon the perception of the other, and vice
versa—which cannot occur in the succession of phenomena, as we have
shown in the explanation of the second principle. Thus I can perceive
the moon and then the earth, or conversely, first the earth and then
the moon; and for the reason that my perceptions of these objects can
reciprocally follow each other, I say, they exist contemporaneously.
Now coexistence is the existence of the manifold in the same time. But
time itself is not an object of perception; and therefore we cannot
conclude from the fact that things are placed in the same time, the
other fact, that the perception of these things can follow each other
reciprocally. The synthesis of the imagination in apprehension would
only present to us each of these perceptions as present in the subject
when the other is not present, and contrariwise; but would not show
that the objects are coexistent, that is to say, that, if the one
exists, the other also exists in the same time, and that this is
necessarily so, in order that the perceptions may be capable of
following each other reciprocally. It follows that a conception of the
understanding or category of the reciprocal sequence of the
determinations of phenomena (existing, as they do, apart from each
other, and yet contemporaneously), is requisite to justify us in saying
that the reciprocal succession of perceptions has its foundation in the
object, and to enable us to represent coexistence as objective. But
that relation of substances in which the one contains determinations
the ground of which is in the other substance, is the relation of
influence. And, when this influence is reciprocal, it is the relation
of community or reciprocity. Consequently the coexistence of substances
in space cannot be cognized in experience otherwise than under the
precondition of their reciprocal action. This is therefore the
condition of the possibility of things themselves as objects of
experience.

Things are coexistent, in so far as they exist in one and the same
time. But how can we know that they exist in one and the same time?
Only by observing that the order in the synthesis of apprehension of
the manifold is arbitrary and a matter of indifference, that is to say,
that it can proceed from A, through B, C, D, to E, or contrariwise from
E to A. For if they were successive in time (and in the order, let us
suppose, which begins with A), it is quite impossible for the
apprehension in perception to begin with E and go backwards to A,
inasmuch as A belongs to past time and, therefore, cannot be an object
of apprehension.

Let us assume that in a number of substances considered as phenomena
each is completely isolated, that is, that no one acts upon another.
Then I say that the coexistence of these cannot be an object of
possible perception and that the existence of one cannot, by any mode
of empirical synthesis, lead us to the existence of another. For we
imagine them in this case to be separated by a completely void space,
and thus perception, which proceeds from the one to the other in time,
would indeed determine their existence by means of a following
perception, but would be quite unable to distinguish whether the one
phenomenon follows objectively upon the first, or is coexistent with
it.

Besides the mere fact of existence, then, there must be something by
means of which A determines the position of B in time and, conversely,
B the position of A; because only under this condition can substances
be empirically represented as existing contemporaneously. Now that
alone determines the position of another thing in time which is the
cause of it or of its determinations. Consequently every substance
(inasmuch as it can have succession predicated of it only in respect of
its determinations) must contain the causality of certain
determinations in another substance, and at the same time the effects
of the causality of the other in itself. That is to say, substances
must stand (mediately or immediately) in dynamical community with each
other, if coexistence is to be cognized in any possible experience.
But, in regard to objects of experience, that is absolutely necessary
without which the experience of these objects would itself be
impossible. Consequently it is absolutely necessary that all substances
in the world of phenomena, in so far as they are coexistent, stand in a
relation of complete community of reciprocal action to each other.

The word community has in our language[33] two meanings, and contains
the two notions conveyed in the Latin communio and commercium. We
employ it in this place in the latter sense—that of a dynamical
community, without which even the community of place (communio spatii)
could not be empirically cognized. In our experiences it is easy to
observe that it is only the continuous influences in all parts of space
that can conduct our senses from one object to another; that the light
which plays between our eyes and the heavenly bodies produces a
mediating community between them and us, and thereby evidences their
coexistence with us; that we cannot empirically change our position
(perceive this change), unless the existence of matter throughout the
whole of space rendered possible the perception of the positions we
occupy; and that this perception can prove the contemporaneous
existence of these places only through their reciprocal influence, and
thereby also the coexistence of even the most remote objects—although
in this case the proof is only mediate. Without community, every
perception (of a phenomenon in space) is separated from every other and
isolated, and the chain of empirical representations, that is, of
experience, must, with the appearance of a new object, begin entirely
de novo, without the least connection with preceding representations,
and without standing towards these even in the relation of time. My
intention here is by no means to combat the notion of empty space; for
it may exist where our perceptions cannot exist, inasmuch as they
cannot reach thereto, and where, therefore, no empirical perception of
coexistence takes place. But in this case it is not an object of
possible experience.

 [33] German

The following remarks may be useful in the way of explanation. In the
mind, all phenomena, as contents of a possible experience, must exist
in community (communio) of apperception or consciousness, and in so far
as it is requisite that objects be represented as coexistent and
connected, in so far must they reciprocally determine the position in
time of each other and thereby constitute a whole. If this subjective
community is to rest upon an objective basis, or to be applied to
substances as phenomena, the perception of one substance must render
possible the perception of another, and conversely. For otherwise
succession, which is always found in perceptions as apprehensions,
would be predicated of external objects, and their representation of
their coexistence be thus impossible. But this is a reciprocal
influence, that is to say, a real community (commercium) of substances,
without which therefore the empirical relation of coexistence would be
a notion beyond the reach of our minds. By virtue of this commercium,
phenomena, in so far as they are apart from, and nevertheless in
connection with each other, constitute a compositum reale. Such
composita are possible in many different ways. The three dynamical
relations then, from which all others spring, are those of inherence,
consequence, and composition.

These, then, are the three analogies of experience. They are nothing
more than principles of the determination of the existence of phenomena
in time, according to the three modi of this determination; to wit, the
relation to time itself as a quantity (the quantity of existence, that
is, duration), the relation in time as a series or succession, finally,
the relation in time as the complex of all existence (simultaneity).
This unity of determination in regard to time is thoroughly dynamical;
that is to say, time is not considered as that in which experience
determines immediately to every existence its position; for this is
impossible, inasmuch as absolute time is not an object of perception,
by means of which phenomena can be connected with each other. On the
contrary, the rule of the understanding, through which alone the
existence of phenomena can receive synthetical unity as regards
relations of time, determines for every phenomenon its position in
time, and consequently à priori, and with validity for all and every
time.

By nature, in the empirical sense of the word, we understand the
totality of phenomena connected, in respect of their existence,
according to necessary rules, that is, laws. There are therefore
certain laws (which are moreover à priori) which make nature possible;
and all empirical laws can exist only by means of experience, and by
virtue of those primitive laws through which experience itself becomes
possible. The purpose of the analogies is therefore to represent to us
the unity of nature in the connection of all phenomena under certain
exponents, the only business of which is to express the relation of
time (in so far as it contains all existence in itself) to the unity of
apperception, which can exist in synthesis only according to rules. The
combined expression of all is this: “All phenomena exist in one nature,
and must so exist, inasmuch as without this à priori unity, no unity of
experience, and consequently no determination of objects in experience,
is possible.”

As regards the mode of proof which we have employed in treating of
these transcendental laws of nature, and the peculiar character of
it we must make one remark, which will at the same time be important
as a guide in every other attempt to demonstrate the truth of
intellectual and likewise synthetical propositions à priori. Had we
endeavoured to prove these analogies dogmatically, that is, from
conceptions; that is to say, had we employed this method in attempting
to show that everything which exists, exists only in that which is
permanent—that every thing or event presupposes the existence of
something in a preceding state, upon which it follows in conformity
with a rule—lastly, that in the manifold, which is coexistent, the
states coexist in connection with each other according to a rule, all
our labour would have been utterly in vain. For mere conceptions of
things, analyse them as we may, cannot enable us to conclude from the
existence of one object to the existence of another. What other course
was left for us to pursue? This only, to demonstrate the possibility
of experience as a cognition in which at last all objects must be
capable of being presented to us, if the representation of them is
to possess any objective reality. Now in this third, this mediating
term, the essential form of which consists in the synthetical unity
of the apperception of all phenomena, we found à priori conditions
of the universal and necessary determination as to time of all
existences in the world of phenomena, without which the empirical
determination thereof as to time would itself be impossible, and we
also discovered rules of synthetical unity à priori, by means of
which we could anticipate experience. For want of this method, and
from the fancy that it was possible to discover a dogmatical proof
of the synthetical propositions which are requisite in the empirical
employment of the understanding, has it happened that a proof of the
principle of sufficient reason has been so often attempted, and always
in vain. The other two analogies nobody has ever thought of, although
they have always been silently employed by the mind,[34] because the
guiding thread furnished by the categories was wanting, the guide which
alone can enable us to discover every hiatus, both in the system of
conceptions and of principles.

 [34] The unity of the universe, in which all phenomena to be
 connected, is evidently a mere consequence of the admitted principle
 of the community of all substances which are coexistent. For were
 substances isolated, they could not as parts constitute a whole, and
 were their connection (reciprocal action of the manifold) not
 necessary from the very fact of coexistence, we could not conclude
 from the fact of the latter as a merely ideal relation to the former
 as a real one. We have, however, shown in its place that community is
 the proper ground of the possibility of an empirical cognition of
 coexistence, and that we may therefore properly reason from the latter
 to the former as its condition.

4. THE POSTULATES OF EMPIRICAL THOUGHT.

1. That which agrees with the formal conditions (intuition and
conception) of experience, is possible.

2. That which coheres with the material conditions of experience
(sensation), is real.

3. That whose coherence with the real is determined according to
universal conditions of experience is (exists) necessary.

Explanation.

The categories of modality possess this peculiarity, that they do not
in the least determine the object, or enlarge the conception to which
they are annexed as predicates, but only express its relation to the
faculty of cognition. Though my conception of a thing is in itself
complete, I am still entitled to ask whether the object of it is merely
possible, or whether it is also real, or, if the latter, whether it is
also necessary. But hereby the object itself is not more definitely
determined in thought, but the question is only in what relation it,
including all its determinations, stands to the understanding and its
employment in experience, to the empirical faculty of judgement, and to
the reason of its application to experience.

For this very reason, too, the categories of modality are nothing more
than explanations of the conceptions of possibility, reality, and
necessity, as employed in experience, and at the same time,
restrictions of all the categories to empirical use alone, not
authorizing the transcendental employment of them. For if they are to
have something more than a merely logical significance, and to be
something more than a mere analytical expression of the form of
thought, and to have a relation to things and their possibility,
reality, or necessity, they must concern possible experience and its
synthetical unity, in which alone objects of cognition can be given.

The postulate of the possibility of things requires also, that the
conception of the things agree with the formal conditions of our
experience in general. But this, that is to say, the objective form of
experience, contains all the kinds of synthesis which are requisite for
the cognition of objects. A conception which contains a synthesis must
be regarded as empty and, without reference to an object, if its
synthesis does not belong to experience—either as borrowed from it, and
in this case it is called an empirical conception, or such as is the
ground and à priori condition of experience (its form), and in this
case it is a pure conception, a conception which nevertheless belongs
to experience, inasmuch as its object can be found in this alone. For
where shall we find the criterion or character of the possibility of an
object which is cogitated by means of an à priori synthetical
conception, if not in the synthesis which constitutes the form of
empirical cognition of objects? That in such a conception no
contradiction exists is indeed a necessary logical condition, but very
far from being sufficient to establish the objective reality of the
conception, that is, the possibility of such an object as is thought in
the conception. Thus, in the conception of a figure which is contained
within two straight lines, there is no contradiction, for the
conceptions of two straight lines and of their junction contain no
negation of a figure. The impossibility in such a case does not rest
upon the conception in itself, but upon the construction of it in
space, that is to say, upon the conditions of space and its
determinations. But these have themselves objective reality, that is,
they apply to possible things, because they contain à priori the form
of experience in general.

And now we shall proceed to point out the extensive utility and
influence of this postulate of possibility. When I represent to myself
a thing that is permanent, so that everything in it which changes
belongs merely to its state or condition, from such a conception alone
I never can cognize that such a thing is possible. Or, if I represent
to myself something which is so constituted that, when it is posited,
something else follows always and infallibly, my thought contains no
self-contradiction; but whether such a property as causality is to be
found in any possible thing, my thought alone affords no means of
judging. Finally, I can represent to myself different things
(substances) which are so constituted that the state or condition of
one causes a change in the state of the other, and reciprocally; but
whether such a relation is a property of things cannot be perceived
from these conceptions, which contain a merely arbitrary synthesis.
Only from the fact, therefore, that these conceptions express à priori
the relations of perceptions in every experience, do we know that they
possess objective reality, that is, transcendental truth; and that
independent of experience, though not independent of all relation to
form of an experience in general and its synthetical unity, in which
alone objects can be empirically cognized.

But when we fashion to ourselves new conceptions of substances, forces,
action, and reaction, from the material presented to us by perception,
without following the example of experience in their connection, we
create mere chimeras, of the possibility of which we cannot discover
any criterion, because we have not taken experience for our
instructress, though we have borrowed the conceptions from her. Such
fictitious conceptions derive their character of possibility not, like
the categories, à priori, as conceptions on which all experience
depends, but only, à posteriori, as conceptions given by means of
experience itself, and their possibility must either be cognized à
posteriori and empirically, or it cannot be cognized at all. A
substance which is permanently present in space, yet without filling it
(like that tertium quid between matter and the thinking subject which
some have tried to introduce into metaphysics), or a peculiar
fundamental power of the mind of intuiting the future by anticipation
(instead of merely inferring from past and present events), or,
finally, a power of the mind to place itself in community of thought
with other men, however distant they may be—these are conceptions the
possibility of which has no ground to rest upon. For they are not based
upon experience and its known laws; and, without experience, they are a
merely arbitrary conjunction of thoughts, which, though containing no
internal contradiction, has no claim to objective reality, neither,
consequently, to the possibility of such an object as is thought in
these conceptions. As far as concerns reality, it is self-evident that
we cannot cogitate such a possibility in concreto without the aid of
experience; because reality is concerned only with sensation, as the
matter of experience, and not with the form of thought, with which we
can no doubt indulge in shaping fancies.

But I pass by everything which derives its possibility from reality in
experience, and I purpose treating here merely of the possibility of
things by means of à priori conceptions. I maintain, then, that the
possibility of things is not derived from such conceptions per se, but
only when considered as formal and objective conditions of an
experience in general.

It seems, indeed, as if the possibility of a triangle could be cognized
from the conception of it alone (which is certainly independent of
experience); for we can certainly give to the conception a
corresponding object completely à priori, that is to say, we can
construct it. But as a triangle is only the form of an object, it must
remain a mere product of the imagination, and the possibility of the
existence of an object corresponding to it must remain doubtful, unless
we can discover some other ground, unless we know that the figure can
be cogitated under the conditions upon which all objects of experience
rest. Now, the facts that space is a formal condition à priori of
external experience, that the formative synthesis, by which we
construct a triangle in imagination, is the very same as that we employ
in the apprehension of a phenomenon for the purpose of making an
empirical conception of it, are what alone connect the notion of the
possibility of such a thing, with the conception of it. In the same
manner, the possibility of continuous quantities, indeed of quantities
in general, for the conceptions of them are without exception
synthetical, is never evident from the conceptions in themselves, but
only when they are considered as the formal conditions of the
determination of objects in experience. And where, indeed, should we
look for objects to correspond to our conceptions, if not in
experience, by which alone objects are presented to us? It is, however,
true that without antecedent experience we can cognize and characterize
the possibility of things, relatively to the formal conditions, under
which something is determined in experience as an object, consequently,
completely à priori. But still this is possible only in relation to
experience and within its limits.

The postulate concerning the cognition of the reality of things
requires perception, consequently conscious sensation, not indeed
immediately, that is, of the object itself, whose existence is to be
cognized, but still that the object have some connection with a real
perception, in accordance with the analogies of experience, which
exhibit all kinds of real connection in experience.

From the mere conception of a thing it is impossible to conclude its
existence. For, let the conception be ever so complete, and containing
a statement of all the determinations of the thing, the existence of it
has nothing to do with all this, but only with the question whether
such a thing is given, so that the perception of it can in every case
precede the conception. For the fact that the conception of it precedes
the perception, merely indicates the possibility of its existence; it
is perception which presents matter to the conception, that is the sole
criterion of reality. Prior to the perception of the thing, however,
and therefore comparatively à priori, we are able to cognize its
existence, provided it stands in connection with some perceptions
according to the principles of the empirical conjunction of these, that
is, in conformity with the analogies of perception. For, in this case,
the existence of the supposed thing is connected with our perception in
a possible experience, and we are able, with the guidance of these
analogies, to reason in the series of possible perceptions from a thing
which we do really perceive to the thing we do not perceive. Thus, we
cognize the existence of a magnetic matter penetrating all bodies from
the perception of the attraction of the steel-filings by the magnet,
although the constitution of our organs renders an immediate perception
of this matter impossible for us. For, according to the laws of
sensibility and the connected context of our perceptions, we should in
an experience come also on an immediate empirical intuition of this
matter, if our senses were more acute—but this obtuseness has no
influence upon and cannot alter the form of possible experience in
general. Our knowledge of the existence of things reaches as far as our
perceptions, and what may be inferred from them according to empirical
laws, extend. If we do not set out from experience, or do not proceed
according to the laws of the empirical connection of phenomena, our
pretensions to discover the existence of a thing which we do not
immediately perceive are vain. Idealism, however, brings forward
powerful objections to these rules for proving existence mediately.
This is, therefore, the proper place for its refutation.

REFUTATION OF IDEALISM.

Idealism—I mean material idealism—is the theory which declares the
existence of objects in space without us to be either () doubtful and
indemonstrable, or (2) false and impossible. The first is the
problematical idealism of Descartes, who admits the undoubted certainty
of only one empirical assertion (assertio), to wit, “I am.” The second
is the dogmatical idealism of Berkeley, who maintains that space,
together with all the objects of which it is the inseparable condition,
is a thing which is in itself impossible, and that consequently the
objects in space are mere products of the imagination. The dogmatical
theory of idealism is unavoidable, if we regard space as a property of
things in themselves; for in that case it is, with all to which it
serves as condition, a nonentity. But the foundation for this kind of
idealism we have already destroyed in the transcendental æsthetic.
Problematical idealism, which makes no such assertion, but only alleges
our incapacity to prove the existence of anything besides ourselves by
means of immediate experience, is a theory rational and evidencing a
thorough and philosophical mode of thinking, for it observes the rule
not to form a decisive judgement before sufficient proof be shown. The
desired proof must therefore demonstrate that we have experience of
external things, and not mere fancies. For this purpose, we must prove,
that our internal and, to Descartes, indubitable experience is itself
possible only under the previous assumption of external experience.

THEOREM.

The simple but empirically determined consciousness of my own existence
proves the existence of external objects in space.

PROOF

I am conscious of my own existence as determined in time. All
determination in regard to time presupposes the existence of something
permanent in perception. But this permanent something cannot be
something in me, for the very reason that my existence in time is
itself determined by this permanent something. It follows that the
perception of this permanent existence is possible only through a thing
without me and not through the mere representation of a thing without
me. Consequently, the determination of my existence in time is possible
only through the existence of real things external to me. Now,
consciousness in time is necessarily connected with the consciousness
of the possibility of this determination in time. Hence it follows that
consciousness in time is necessarily connected also with the existence
of things without me, inasmuch as the existence of these things is the
condition of determination in time. That is to say, the consciousness
of my own existence is at the same time an immediate consciousness of
the existence of other things without me.

Remark I. The reader will observe, that in the foregoing proof the game
which idealism plays is retorted upon itself, and with more justice. It
assumed that the only immediate experience is internal and that from
this we can only infer the existence of external things. But, as always
happens, when we reason from given effects to determined causes,
idealism has reasoned with too much haste and uncertainty, for it is
quite possible that the cause of our representations may lie in
ourselves, and that we ascribe it falsely to external things. But our
proof shows that external experience is properly immediate,[35] that
only by virtue of it—not, indeed, the consciousness of our own
existence, but certainly the determination of our existence in time,
that is, internal experience—is possible. It is true, that the
representation “I am,” which is the expression of the consciousness
which can accompany all my thoughts, is that which immediately includes
the existence of a subject. But in this representation we cannot find
any knowledge of the subject, and therefore also no empirical
knowledge, that is, experience. For experience contains, in addition to
the thought of something existing, intuition, and in this case it must
be internal intuition, that is, time, in relation to which the subject
must be determined. But the existence of external things is absolutely
requisite for this purpose, so that it follows that internal experience
is itself possible only mediately and through external experience.

 [35] The immediate consciousness of the existence of external things
 is, in the preceding theorem, not presupposed, but proved, by the
 possibility of this consciousness understood by us or not. The
 question as to the possibility of it would stand thus: “Have we an
 internal sense, but no external sense, and is our belief in external
 perception a mere delusion?” But it is evident that, in order merely
 to fancy to ourselves anything as external, that is, to present it to
 the sense in intuition we must already possess an external sense, and
 must thereby distinguish immediately the mere receptivity of an
 external intuition from the spontaneity which characterizes every act
 of imagination. For merely to imagine also an external sense, would
 annihilate the faculty of intuition itself which is to be determined
 by the imagination.

Remark II. Now with this view all empirical use of our faculty of
cognition in the determination of time is in perfect accordance. Its
truth is supported by the fact that it is possible to perceive a
determination of time only by means of a change in external relations
(motion) to the permanent in space (for example, we become aware of the
sun’s motion by observing the changes of his relation to the objects of
this earth). But this is not all. We find that we possess nothing
permanent that can correspond and be submitted to the conception of a
substance as intuition, except matter. This idea of permanence is not
itself derived from external experience, but is an à priori necessary
condition of all determination of time, consequently also of the
internal sense in reference to our own existence, and that through the
existence of external things. In the representation “I,” the
consciousness of myself is not an intuition, but a merely intellectual
representation produced by the spontaneous activity of a thinking
subject. It follows, that this “i” has not any predicate of intuition,
which, in its character of permanence, could serve as correlate to the
determination of time in the internal sense—in the same way as
impenetrability is the correlate of matter as an empirical intuition.

Remark III. From the fact that the existence of external things is a
necessary condition of the possibility of a determined consciousness of
ourselves, it does not follow that every intuitive representation of
external things involves the existence of these things, for their
representations may very well be the mere products of the imagination
(in dreams as well as in madness); though, indeed, these are themselves
created by the reproduction of previous external perceptions, which, as
has been shown, are possible only through the reality of external
objects. The sole aim of our remarks has, however, been to prove that
internal experience in general is possible only through external
experience in general. Whether this or that supposed experience be
purely imaginary must be discovered from its particular determinations
and by comparing these with the criteria of all real experience.

Finally, as regards the third postulate, it applies to material
necessity in existence, and not to merely formal and logical necessity
in the connection of conceptions. Now as we cannot cognize completely à
priori the existence of any object of sense, though we can do so
comparatively à priori, that is, relatively to some other previously
given existence—a cognition, however, which can only be of such an
existence as must be contained in the complex of experience, of which
the previously given perception is a part—the necessity of existence
can never be cognized from conceptions, but always, on the contrary,
from its connection with that which is an object of perception. But the
only existence cognized, under the condition of other given phenomena,
as necessary, is the existence of effects from given causes in
conformity with the laws of causality. It is consequently not the
necessity of the existence of things (as substances), but the necessity
of the state of things that we cognize, and that not immediately, but
by means of the existence of other states given in perception,
according to empirical laws of causality. Hence it follows that the
criterion of necessity is to be found only in the law of possible
experience—that everything which happens is determined à priori in the
phenomenon by its cause. Thus we cognize only the necessity of effects
in nature, the causes of which are given us. Moreover, the criterion of
necessity in existence possesses no application beyond the field of
possible experience, and even in this it is not valid of the existence
of things as substances, because these can never be considered as
empirical effects, or as something that happens and has a beginning.
Necessity, therefore, regards only the relations of phenomena according
to the dynamical law of causality, and the possibility grounded
thereon, of reasoning from some given existence (of a cause) à priori
to another existence (of an effect). “Everything that happens is
hypothetically necessary,” is a principle which subjects the changes
that take place in the world to a law, that is, to a rule of necessary
existence, without which nature herself could not possibly exist. Hence
the proposition, “Nothing happens by blind chance (in mundo non datur
casus),” is an à priori law of nature. The case is the same with the
proposition, “Necessity in nature is not blind,” that is, it is
conditioned, consequently intelligible necessity (non datur fatum).
Both laws subject the play of change to “a nature of things (as
phenomena),” or, which is the same thing, to the unity of the
understanding, and through the understanding alone can changes belong
to an experience, as the synthetical unity of phenomena. Both belong to
the class of dynamical principles. The former is properly a consequence
of the principle of causality—one of the analogies of experience. The
latter belongs to the principles of modality, which to the
determination of causality adds the conception of necessity, which is
itself, however, subject to a rule of the understanding. The principle
of continuity forbids any leap in the series of phenomena regarded as
changes (in mundo non datur saltus); and likewise, in the complex of
all empirical intuitions in space, any break or hiatus between two
phenomena (non datur hiatus)—for we can so express the principle, that
experience can admit nothing which proves the existence of a vacuum, or
which even admits it as a part of an empirical synthesis. For, as
regards a vacuum or void, which we may cogitate as out and beyond the
field of possible experience (the world), such a question cannot come
before the tribunal of mere understanding, which decides only upon
questions that concern the employment of given phenomena for the
construction of empirical cognition. It is rather a problem for ideal
reason, which passes beyond the sphere of a possible experience and
aims at forming a judgement of that which surrounds and circumscribes
it, and the proper place for the consideration of it is the
transcendental dialectic. These four propositions, “In mundo non datur
hiatus, non datur saltus, non datur casus, non datur fatum,” as well as
all principles of transcendental origin, we could very easily exhibit
in their proper order, that is, in conformity with the order of the
categories, and assign to each its proper place. But the already
practised reader will do this for himself, or discover the clue to such
an arrangement. But the combined result of all is simply this, to admit
into the empirical synthesis nothing which might cause a break in or be
foreign to the understanding and the continuous connection of all
phenomena, that is, the unity of the conceptions of the understanding.
For in the understanding alone is the unity of experience, in which all
perceptions must have their assigned place, possible.

Whether the field of possibility be greater than that of reality, and
whether the field of the latter be itself greater than that of
necessity, are interesting enough questions, and quite capable of
synthetic solution, questions, however, which come under the
jurisdiction of reason alone. For they are tantamount to asking whether
all things as phenomena do without exception belong to the complex and
connected whole of a single experience, of which every given perception
is a part which therefore cannot be conjoined with any other
phenomena—or, whether my perceptions can belong to more than one
possible experience? The understanding gives to experience, according
to the subjective and formal conditions, of sensibility as well as of
apperception, the rules which alone make this experience possible.
Other forms of intuition besides those of space and time, other forms
of understanding besides the discursive forms of thought, or of
cognition by means of conceptions, we can neither imagine nor make
intelligible to ourselves; and even if we could, they would still not
belong to experience, which is the only mode of cognition by which
objects are presented to us. Whether other perceptions besides those
which belong to the total of our possible experience, and consequently
whether some other sphere of matter exists, the understanding has no
power to decide, its proper occupation being with the synthesis of that
which is given. Moreover, the poverty of the usual arguments which go
to prove the existence of a vast sphere of possibility, of which all
that is real (every object of experience) is but a small part, is very
remarkable. “All real is possible”; from this follows naturally,
according to the logical laws of conversion, the particular
proposition: “Some possible is real.” Now this seems to be equivalent
to: “Much is possible that is not real.” No doubt it does seem as if we
ought to consider the sum of the possible to be greater than that of
the real, from the fact that something must be added to the former to
constitute the latter. But this notion of adding to the possible is
absurd. For that which is not in the sum of the possible, and
consequently requires to be added to it, is manifestly impossible. In
addition to accordance with the formal conditions of experience, the
understanding requires a connection with some perception; but that
which is connected with this perception is real, even although it is
not immediately perceived. But that another series of phenomena, in
complete coherence with that which is given in perception, consequently
more than one all-embracing experience is possible, is an inference
which cannot be concluded from the data given us by experience, and
still less without any data at all. That which is possible only under
conditions which are themselves merely possible, is not possible in any
respect. And yet we can find no more certain ground on which to base
the discussion of the question whether the sphere of possibility is
wider than that of experience.

I have merely mentioned these questions, that in treating of the
conception of the understanding, there might be no omission of anything
that, in the common opinion, belongs to them. In reality, however, the
notion of absolute possibility (possibility which is valid in every
respect) is not a mere conception of the understanding, which can be
employed empirically, but belongs to reason alone, which passes the
bounds of all empirical use of the understanding. We have, therefore,
contented ourselves with a merely critical remark, leaving the subject
to be explained in the sequel.

Before concluding this fourth section, and at the same time the system
of all principles of the pure understanding, it seems proper to mention
the reasons which induced me to term the principles of modality
postulates. This expression I do not here use in the sense which some
more recent philosophers, contrary to its meaning with mathematicians,
to whom the word properly belongs, attach to it—that of a proposition,
namely, immediately certain, requiring neither deduction nor proof. For
if, in the case of synthetical propositions, however evident they may
be, we accord to them without deduction, and merely on the strength of
their own pretensions, unqualified belief, all critique of the
understanding is entirely lost; and, as there is no want of bold
pretensions, which the common belief (though for the philosopher this
is no credential) does not reject, the understanding lies exposed to
every delusion and conceit, without the power of refusing its assent to
those assertions, which, though illegitimate, demand acceptance as
veritable axioms. When, therefore, to the conception of a thing an à
priori determination is synthetically added, such a proposition must
obtain, if not a proof, at least a deduction of the legitimacy of its
assertion.

The principles of modality are, however, not objectively synthetical,
for the predicates of possibility, reality, and necessity do not in the
least augment the conception of that of which they are affirmed,
inasmuch as they contribute nothing to the representation of the
object. But as they are, nevertheless, always synthetical, they are so
merely subjectively. That is to say, they have a reflective power, and
apply to the conception of a thing, of which, in other respects, they
affirm nothing, the faculty of cognition in which the conception
originates and has its seat. So that if the conception merely agree
with the formal conditions of experience, its object is called
possible; if it is in connection with perception, and determined
thereby, the object is real; if it is determined according to
conceptions by means of the connection of perceptions, the object is
called necessary. The principles of modality therefore predicate of a
conception nothing more than the procedure of the faculty of cognition
which generated it. Now a postulate in mathematics is a practical
proposition which contains nothing but the synthesis by which we
present an object to ourselves, and produce the conception of it, for
example—“With a given line, to describe a circle upon a plane, from a
given point”; and such a proposition does not admit of proof, because
the procedure, which it requires, is exactly that by which alone it is
possible to generate the conception of such a figure. With the same
right, accordingly, can we postulate the principles of modality,
because they do not augment[36] the conception of a thing but merely
indicate the manner in which it is connected with the faculty of
cognition.

 [36] When I think the reality of a thing, I do really think more than
 the possibility, but not in the thing; for that can never contain more
 in reality than was contained in its complete possibility. But while
 the notion of possibility is merely the notion of a position of thing
 in relation to the understanding (its empirical use), reality is the
 conjunction of the thing with perception.

GENERAL REMARK ON THE SYSTEM OF PRINCIPLES.

It is very remarkable that we cannot perceive the possibility of a
thing from the category alone, but must always have an intuition, by
which to make evident the objective reality of the pure conception of
the understanding. Take, for example, the categories of relation. How
(1) a thing can exist only as a subject, and not as a mere
determination of other things, that is, can be substance; or how (2),
because something exists, some other thing must exist, consequently how
a thing can be a cause; or how (3), when several things exist, from the
fact that one of these things exists, some consequence to the others
follows, and reciprocally, and in this way a community of substances
can be possible—are questions whose solution cannot be obtained from
mere conceptions. The very same is the case with the other categories;
for example, how a thing can be of the same sort with many others, that
is, can be a quantity, and so on. So long as we have not intuition we
cannot know whether we do really think an object by the categories, and
where an object can anywhere be found to cohere with them, and thus the
truth is established, that the categories are not in themselves
cognitions, but mere forms of thought for the construction of
cognitions from given intuitions. For the same reason is it true that
from categories alone no synthetical proposition can be made. For
example: “In every existence there is substance,” that is, something
that can exist only as a subject and not as mere predicate; or,
“Everything is a quantity”—to construct propositions such as these, we
require something to enable us to go out beyond the given conception
and connect another with it. For the same reason the attempt to prove a
synthetical proposition by means of mere conceptions, for example:
“Everything that exists contingently has a cause,” has never succeeded.
We could never get further than proving that, without this relation to
conceptions, we could not conceive the existence of the contingent,
that is, could not à priori through the understanding cognize the
existence of such a thing; but it does not hence follow that this is
also the condition of the possibility of the thing itself that is said
to be contingent. If, accordingly; we look back to our proof of the
principle of causality, we shall find that we were able to prove it as
valid only of objects of possible experience, and, indeed, only as
itself the principle of the possibility of experience, Consequently of
the cognition of an object given in empirical intuition, and not from
mere conceptions. That, however, the proposition: “Everything that is
contingent must have a cause,” is evident to every one merely from
conceptions, is not to be denied. But in this case the conception of
the contingent is cogitated as involving not the category of modality
(as that the non-existence of which can be conceived) but that of
relation (as that which can exist only as the consequence of something
else), and so it is really an identical proposition: “That which can
exist only as a consequence, has a cause.” In fact, when we have to
give examples of contingent existence, we always refer to changes, and
not merely to the possibility of conceiving the opposite.[37] But
change is an event, which, as such, is possible only through a cause,
and considered per se its non-existence is therefore possible, and we
become cognizant of its contingency from the fact that it can exist
only as the effect of a cause. Hence, if a thing is assumed to be
contingent, it is an analytical proposition to say, it has a cause.

 [37] We can easily conceive the non-existence of matter; but the
 ancients did not thence infer its contingency. But even the
 alternation of the existence and non-existence of a given state in a
 thing, in which all change consists, by no means proves the
 contingency of that state—the ground of proof being the reality of its
 opposite. For example, a body is in a state of rest after motion, but
 we cannot infer the contingency of the motion from the fact that the
 former is the opposite of the latter. For this opposite is merely a
 logical and not a real opposite to the other. If we wish to
 demonstrate the contingency of the motion, what we ought to prove is
 that, instead of the motion which took place in the preceding point of
 time, it was possible for the body to have been then in rest, not,
 that it is afterwards in rest; for in this case, both opposites are
 perfectly consistent with each other.

But it is still more remarkable that, to understand the possibility of
things according to the categories and thus to demonstrate the
objective reality of the latter, we require not merely intuitions, but
external intuitions. If, for example, we take the pure conceptions of
relation, we find that (1) for the purpose of presenting to the
conception of substance something permanent in intuition corresponding
thereto and thus of demonstrating the objective reality of this
conception, we require an intuition (of matter) in space, because space
alone is permanent and determines things as such, while time, and with
it all that is in the internal sense, is in a state of continual flow;
(2) in order to represent change as the intuition corresponding to the
conception of causality, we require the representation of motion as
change in space; in fact, it is through it alone that changes, the
possibility of which no pure understanding can perceive, are capable of
being intuited. Change is the connection of determinations
contradictorily opposed to each other in the existence of one and the
same thing. Now, how it is possible that out of a given state one quite
opposite to it in the same thing should follow, reason without an
example can not only not conceive, but cannot even make intelligible
without intuition; and this intuition is the motion of a point in
space; the existence of which in different spaces (as a consequence of
opposite determinations) alone makes the intuition of change possible.
For, in order to make even internal change cognitable, we require to
represent time, as the form of the internal sense, figuratively by a
line, and the internal change by the drawing of that line (motion), and
consequently are obliged to employ external intuition to be able to
represent the successive existence of ourselves in different states.
The proper ground of this fact is that all change to be perceived as
change presupposes something permanent in intuition, while in the
internal sense no permanent intuition is to be found. Lastly, the
objective possibility of the category of community cannot be conceived
by mere reason, and consequently its objective reality cannot be
demonstrated without an intuition, and that external in space. For how
can we conceive the possibility of community, that is, when several
substances exist, that some effect on the existence of the one follows
from the existence of the other, and reciprocally, and therefore that,
because something exists in the latter, something else must exist in
the former, which could not be understood from its own existence alone?
For this is the very essence of community—which is inconceivable as a
property of things which are perfectly isolated. Hence, Leibnitz, in
attributing to the substances of the world—as cogitated by the
understanding alone—a community, required the mediating aid of a
divinity; for, from their existence, such a property seemed to him with
justice inconceivable. But we can very easily conceive the possibility
of community (of substances as phenomena) if we represent them to
ourselves as in space, consequently in external intuition. For external
intuition contains in itself à priori formal external relations, as the
conditions of the possibility of the real relations of action and
reaction, and therefore of the possibility of community. With the same
ease can it be demonstrated, that the possibility of things as
quantities, and consequently the objective reality of the category of
quantity, can be grounded only in external intuition, and that by its
means alone is the notion of quantity appropriated by the internal
sense. But I must avoid prolixity, and leave the task of illustrating
this by examples to the reader’s own reflection.

The above remarks are of the greatest importance, not only for the
confirmation of our previous confutation of idealism, but still more
when the subject of self-cognition by mere internal consciousness and
the determination of our own nature without the aid of external
empirical intuitions is under discussion, for the indication of the
grounds of the possibility of such a cognition.

The result of the whole of this part of the analytic of principles is,
therefore: “All principles of the pure understanding are nothing more
than à priori principles of the possibility of experience, and to
experience alone do all à priori synthetical propositions apply and
relate”; indeed, their possibility itself rests entirely on this
relation.

Chapter III Of the Ground of the Division of all Objects into Phenomena
and Noumena

We have now not only traversed the region of the pure understanding and
carefully surveyed every part of it, but we have also measured it, and
assigned to everything therein its proper place. But this land is an
island, and enclosed by nature herself within unchangeable limits. It
is the land of truth (an attractive word), surrounded by a wide and
stormy ocean, the region of illusion, where many a fog-bank, many an
iceberg, seems to the mariner, on his voyage of discovery, a new
country, and, while constantly deluding him with vain hopes, engages
him in dangerous adventures, from which he never can desist, and which
yet he never can bring to a termination. But before venturing upon this
sea, in order to explore it in its whole extent, and to arrive at a
certainty whether anything is to be discovered there, it will not be
without advantage if we cast our eyes upon the chart of the land that
we are about to leave, and to ask ourselves, firstly, whether we cannot
rest perfectly contented with what it contains, or whether we must not
of necessity be contented with it, if we can find nowhere else a solid
foundation to build upon; and, secondly, by what title we possess this
land itself, and how we hold it secure against all hostile claims?
Although, in the course of our analytic, we have already given
sufficient answers to these questions, yet a summary recapitulation of
these solutions may be useful in strengthening our conviction, by
uniting in one point the momenta of the arguments.

We have seen that everything which the understanding draws from itself,
without borrowing from experience, it nevertheless possesses only for
the behoof and use of experience. The principles of the pure
understanding, whether constitutive à priori (as the mathematical
principles), or merely regulative (as the dynamical), contain nothing
but the pure schema, as it were, of possible experience. For experience
possesses its unity from the synthetical unity which the understanding,
originally and from itself, imparts to the synthesis of the imagination
in relation to apperception, and in à priori relation to and agreement
with which phenomena, as data for a possible cognition, must stand. But
although these rules of the understanding are not only à priori true,
but the very source of all truth, that is, of the accordance of our
cognition with objects, and on this ground, that they contain the basis
of the possibility of experience, as the ensemble of all cognition, it
seems to us not enough to propound what is true—we desire also to be
told what we want to know. If, then, we learn nothing more by this
critical examination than what we should have practised in the merely
empirical use of the understanding, without any such subtle inquiry,
the presumption is that the advantage we reap from it is not worth the
labour bestowed upon it. It may certainly be answered that no rash
curiosity is more prejudicial to the enlargement of our knowledge than
that which must know beforehand the utility of this or that piece of
information which we seek, before we have entered on the needful
investigations, and before one could form the least conception of its
utility, even though it were placed before our eyes. But there is one
advantage in such transcendental inquiries which can be made
comprehensible to the dullest and most reluctant learner—this, namely,
that the understanding which is occupied merely with empirical
exercise, and does not reflect on the sources of its own cognition, may
exercise its functions very well and very successfully, but is quite
unable to do one thing, and that of very great importance, to
determine, namely, the bounds that limit its employment, and to know
what lies within or without its own sphere. This purpose can be
obtained only by such profound investigations as we have instituted.
But if it cannot distinguish whether certain questions lie within its
horizon or not, it can never be sure either as to its claims or
possessions, but must lay its account with many humiliating
corrections, when it transgresses, as it unavoidably will, the limits
of its own territory, and loses itself in fanciful opinions and
blinding illusions.

That the understanding, therefore, cannot make of its à priori
principles, or even of its conceptions, other than an empirical use, is
a proposition which leads to the most important results. A
transcendental use is made of a conception in a fundamental proposition
or principle, when it is referred to things in general and considered
as things in themselves; an empirical use, when it is referred merely
to phenomena, that is, to objects of a possible experience. That the
latter use of a conception is the only admissible one is evident from
the reasons following. For every conception are requisite, firstly, the
logical form of a conception (of thought) general; and, secondly, the
possibility of presenting to this an object to which it may apply.
Failing this latter, it has no sense, and utterly void of content,
although it may contain the logical function for constructing a
conception from certain data. Now, object cannot be given to a
conception otherwise than by intuition, and, even if a pure intuition
antecedent to the object is à priori possible, this pure intuition can
itself obtain objective validity only from empirical intuition, of
which it is itself but the form. All conceptions, therefore, and with
them all principles, however high the degree of their à priori
possibility, relate to empirical intuitions, that is, to data towards a
possible experience. Without this they possess no objective validity,
but are mere play of imagination or of understanding with images or
notions. Let us take, for example, the conceptions of mathematics, and
first in its pure intuitions. “Space has three dimensions”—“Between two
points there can be only one straight line,” etc. Although all these
principles, and the representation of the object with which this
science occupies itself, are generated in the mind entirely à priori,
they would nevertheless have no significance if we were not always able
to exhibit their significance in and by means of phenomena (empirical
objects). Hence it is requisite that an abstract conception be made
sensuous, that is, that an object corresponding to it in intuition be
forthcoming, otherwise the conception remains, as we say, without
sense, that is, without meaning. Mathematics fulfils this requirement
by the construction of the figure, which is a phenomenon evident to the
senses. The same science finds support and significance in number; this
in its turn finds it in the fingers, or in counters, or in lines and
points. The conception itself is always produced à priori, together
with the synthetical principles or formulas from such conceptions; but
the proper employment of them, and their application to objects, can
exist nowhere but in experience, the possibility of which, as regards
its form, they contain à priori.

That this is also the case with all of the categories and the
principles based upon them is evident from the fact that we cannot
render intelligible the possibility of an object corresponding to them
without having recourse to the conditions of sensibility, consequently,
to the form of phenomena, to which, as their only proper objects, their
use must therefore be confined, inasmuch as, if this condition is
removed, all significance, that is, all relation to an object,
disappears, and no example can be found to make it comprehensible what
sort of things we ought to think under such conceptions.

The conception of quantity cannot be explained except by saying that it
is the determination of a thing whereby it can be cogitated how many
times one is placed in it. But this “how many times” is based upon
successive repetition, consequently upon time and the synthesis of the
homogeneous therein. Reality, in contradistinction to negation, can be
explained only by cogitating a time which is either filled therewith or
is void. If I leave out the notion of permanence (which is existence in
all time), there remains in the conception of substance nothing but the
logical notion of subject, a notion of which I endeavour to realize by
representing to myself something that can exist only as a subject. But
not only am I perfectly ignorant of any conditions under which this
logical prerogative can belong to a thing, I can make nothing out of
the notion, and draw no inference from it, because no object to which
to apply the conception is determined, and we consequently do not know
whether it has any meaning at all. In like manner, if I leave out the
notion of time, in which something follows upon some other thing in
conformity with a rule, I can find nothing in the pure category, except
that there is a something of such a sort that from it a conclusion may
be drawn as to the existence of some other thing. But in this case it
would not only be impossible to distinguish between a cause and an
effect, but, as this power to draw conclusions requires conditions of
which I am quite ignorant, the conception is not determined as to the
mode in which it ought to apply to an object. The so-called principle:
“Everything that is contingent has a cause,” comes with a gravity and
self-assumed authority that seems to require no support from without.
But, I ask, what is meant by contingent? The answer is that the
non-existence of which is possible. But I should like very well to know
by what means this possibility of non-existence is to be cognized, if
we do not represent to ourselves a succession in the series of
phenomena, and in this succession an existence which follows a
non-existence, or conversely, consequently, change. For to say, that
the non-existence of a thing is not self-contradictory is a lame appeal
to a logical condition, which is no doubt a necessary condition of the
existence of the conception, but is far from being sufficient for the
real objective possibility of non-existence. I can annihilate in
thought every existing substance without self-contradiction, but I
cannot infer from this their objective contingency in existence, that
is to say, the possibility of their non-existence in itself. As regards
the category of community, it may easily be inferred that, as the pure
categories of substance and causality are incapable of a definition and
explanation sufficient to determine their object without the aid of
intuition, the category of reciprocal causality in the relation of
substances to each other (commercium) is just as little susceptible
thereof. Possibility, existence, and necessity nobody has ever yet been
able to explain without being guilty of manifest tautology, when the
definition has been drawn entirely from the pure understanding. For the
substitution of the logical possibility of the conception—the condition
of which is that it be not self-contradictory, for the transcendental
possibility of things—the condition of which is that there be an object
corresponding to the conception, is a trick which can only deceive the
inexperienced.[38]

 [38] In one word, to none of these conceptions belongs a corresponding
 object, and consequently their real possibility cannot be
 demonstrated, if we take away sensuous intuition—the only intuition
 which we possess—and there then remains nothing but the logical
 possibility, that is, the fact that the conception or thought is
 possible—which, however, is not the question; what we want to know
 being, whether it relates to an object and thus possesses any meaning.

It follows incontestably, that the pure conceptions of the
understanding are incapable of transcendental, and must always be of
empirical use alone, and that the principles of the pure understanding
relate only to the general conditions of a possible experience, to
objects of the senses, and never to things in general, apart from the
mode in which we intuite them.

Transcendental analytic has accordingly this important result, to wit,
that the understanding is competent effect nothing à priori, except the
anticipation of the form of a possible experience in general, and that,
as that which is not phenomenon cannot be an object of experience, it
can never overstep the limits of sensibility, within which alone
objects are presented to us. Its principles are merely principles of
the exposition of phenomena, and the proud name of an ontology, which
professes to present synthetical cognitions à priori of things in
general in a systematic doctrine, must give place to the modest title
of analytic of the pure understanding.

Thought is the act of referring a given intuition to an object. If the
mode of this intuition is unknown to us, the object is merely
transcendental, and the conception of the understanding is employed
only transcendentally, that is, to produce unity in the thought of a
manifold in general. Now a pure category, in which all conditions of
sensuous intuition—as the only intuition we possess—are abstracted,
does not determine an object, but merely expresses the thought of an
object in general, according to different modes. Now, to employ a
conception, the function of judgement is required, by which an object
is subsumed under the conception, consequently the at least formal
condition, under which something can be given in intuition. Failing
this condition of judgement (schema), subsumption is impossible; for
there is in such a case nothing given, which may be subsumed under the
conception. The merely transcendental use of the categories is
therefore, in fact, no use at all and has no determined, or even, as
regards its form, determinable object. Hence it follows that the pure
category is incompetent to establish a synthetical à priori principle,
and that the principles of the pure understanding are only of empirical
and never of transcendental use, and that beyond the sphere of possible
experience no synthetical à priori principles are possible.

It may be advisable, therefore, to express ourselves thus. The pure
categories, apart from the formal conditions of sensibility, have a
merely transcendental meaning, but are nevertheless not of
transcendental use, because this is in itself impossible, inasmuch as
all the conditions of any employment or use of them (in judgements) are
absent, to wit, the formal conditions of the subsumption of an object
under these conceptions. As, therefore, in the character of pure
categories, they must be employed empirically, and cannot be employed
transcendentally, they are of no use at all, when separated from
sensibility, that is, they cannot be applied to an object. They are
merely the pure form of the employment of the understanding in respect
of objects in general and of thought, without its being at the same
time possible to think or to determine any object by their means. But
there lurks at the foundation of this subject an illusion which it is
very difficult to avoid. The categories are not based, as regards their
origin, upon sensibility, like the forms of intuition, space, and time;
they seem, therefore, to be capable of an application beyond the sphere
of sensuous objects. But this is not the case. They are nothing but
mere forms of thought, which contain only the logical faculty of
uniting à priori in consciousness the manifold given in intuition.
Apart, then, from the only intuition possible for us, they have still
less meaning than the pure sensuous forms, space and time, for through
them an object is at least given, while a mode of connection of the
manifold, when the intuition which alone gives the manifold is wanting,
has no meaning at all. At the same time, when we designate certain
objects as phenomena or sensuous existences, thus distinguishing our
mode of intuiting them from their own nature as things in themselves,
it is evident that by this very distinction we as it were place the
latter, considered in this their own nature, although we do not so
intuite them, in opposition to the former, or, on the other hand, we do
so place other possible things, which are not objects of our senses,
but are cogitated by the understanding alone, and call them
intelligible existences (noumena). Now the question arises whether the
pure conceptions of our understanding do possess significance in
respect of these latter, and may possibly be a mode of cognizing them.

But we are met at the very commencement with an ambiguity, which may
easily occasion great misapprehension. The understanding, when it terms
an object in a certain relation phenomenon, at the same time forms out
of this relation a representation or notion of an object in itself, and
hence believes that it can form also conceptions of such objects. Now
as the understanding possesses no other fundamental conceptions besides
the categories, it takes for granted that an object considered as a
thing in itself must be capable of being thought by means of these pure
conceptions, and is thereby led to hold the perfectly undetermined
conception of an intelligible existence, a something out of the sphere
of our sensibility, for a determinate conception of an existence which
we can cognize in some way or other by means of the understanding.

If, by the term noumenon, we understand a thing so far as it is not an
object of our sensuous intuition, thus making abstraction of our mode
of intuiting it, this is a noumenon in the negative sense of the word.
But if we understand by it an object of a non-sensuous intuition, we in
this case assume a peculiar mode of intuition, an intellectual
intuition, to wit, which does not, however, belong to us, of the very
possibility of which we have no notion—and this is a noumenon in the
positive sense.

The doctrine of sensibility is also the doctrine of noumena in the
negative sense, that is, of things which the understanding is obliged
to cogitate apart from any relation to our mode of intuition,
consequently not as mere phenomena, but as things in themselves. But
the understanding at the same time comprehends that it cannot employ
its categories for the consideration of things in themselves, because
these possess significance only in relation to the unity of intuitions
in space and time, and that they are competent to determine this unity
by means of general à priori connecting conceptions only on account of
the pure ideality of space and time. Where this unity of time is not to
be met with, as is the case with noumena, the whole use, indeed the
whole meaning of the categories is entirely lost, for even the
possibility of things to correspond to the categories is in this case
incomprehensible. On this point, I need only refer the reader to what I
have said at the commencement of the General Remark appended to the
foregoing chapter. Now, the possibility of a thing can never be proved
from the fact that the conception of it is not self-contradictory, but
only by means of an intuition corresponding to the conception. If,
therefore, we wish to apply the categories to objects which cannot be
regarded as phenomena, we must have an intuition different from the
sensuous, and in this case the objects would be a noumena in the
positive sense of the word. Now, as such an intuition, that is, an
intellectual intuition, is no part of our faculty of cognition, it is
absolutely impossible for the categories to possess any application
beyond the limits of experience. It may be true that there are
intelligible existences to which our faculty of sensuous intuition has
no relation, and cannot be applied, but our conceptions of the
understanding, as mere forms of thought for our sensuous intuition, do
not extend to these. What, therefore, we call noumenon must be
understood by us as such in a negative sense.

If I take away from an empirical intuition all thought (by means of the
categories), there remains no cognition of any object; for by means of
mere intuition nothing is cogitated, and, from the existence of such or
such an affection of sensibility in me, it does not follow that this
affection or representation has any relation to an object without me.
But if I take away all intuition, there still remains the form of
thought, that is, the mode of determining an object for the manifold of
a possible intuition. Thus the categories do in some measure really
extend further than sensuous intuition, inasmuch as they think objects
in general, without regard to the mode (of sensibility) in which these
objects are given. But they do not for this reason apply to and
determine a wider sphere of objects, because we cannot assume that such
can be given, without presupposing the possibility of another than the
sensuous mode of intuition, a supposition we are not justified in
making.

I call a conception problematical which contains in itself no
contradiction, and which is connected with other cognitions as a
limitation of given conceptions, but whose objective reality cannot be
cognized in any manner. The conception of a noumenon, that is, of a
thing which must be cogitated not as an object of sense, but as a thing
in itself (solely through the pure understanding), is not
self-contradictory, for we are not entitled to maintain that
sensibility is the only possible mode of intuition. Nay, further, this
conception is necessary to restrain sensuous intuition within the
bounds of phenomena, and thus to limit the objective validity of
sensuous cognition; for things in themselves, which lie beyond its
province, are called noumena for the very purpose of indicating that
this cognition does not extend its application to all that the
understanding thinks. But, after all, the possibility of such noumena
is quite incomprehensible, and beyond the sphere of phenomena, all is
for us a mere void; that is to say, we possess an understanding whose
province does problematically extend beyond this sphere, but we do not
possess an intuition, indeed, not even the conception of a possible
intuition, by means of which objects beyond the region of sensibility
could be given us, and in reference to which the understanding might be
employed assertorically. The conception of a noumenon is therefore
merely a limitative conception and therefore only of negative use. But
it is not an arbitrary or fictitious notion, but is connected with the
limitation of sensibility, without, however, being capable of
presenting us with any positive datum beyond this sphere.

The division of objects into phenomena and noumena, and of the world
into a mundus sensibilis and intelligibilis is therefore quite
inadmissible in a positive sense, although conceptions do certainly
admit of such a division; for the class of noumena have no determinate
object corresponding to them, and cannot therefore possess objective
validity. If we abandon the senses, how can it be made conceivable that
the categories (which are the only conceptions that could serve as
conceptions for noumena) have any sense or meaning at all, inasmuch as
something more than the mere unity of thought, namely, a possible
intuition, is requisite for their application to an object? The
conception of a noumenon, considered as merely problematical, is,
however, not only admissible, but, as a limitative conception of
sensibility, absolutely necessary. But, in this case, a noumenon is not
a particular intelligible object for our understanding; on the
contrary, the kind of understanding to which it could belong is itself
a problem, for we cannot form the most distant conception of the
possibility of an understanding which should cognize an object, not
discursively by means of categories, but intuitively in a non-sensuous
intuition. Our understanding attains in this way a sort of negative
extension. That is to say, it is not limited by, but rather limits,
sensibility, by giving the name of noumena to things, not considered as
phenomena, but as things in themselves. But it at the same time
prescribes limits to itself, for it confesses itself unable to cognize
these by means of the categories, and hence is compelled to cogitate
them merely as an unknown something.

I find, however, in the writings of modern authors, an entirely
different use of the expressions, mundus sensibilis and intelligibilis,
which quite departs from the meaning of the ancients—an acceptation in
which, indeed, there is to be found no difficulty, but which at the
same time depends on mere verbal quibbling. According to this meaning,
some have chosen to call the complex of phenomena, in so far as it is
intuited, mundus sensibilis, but in so far as the connection thereof is
cogitated according to general laws of thought, mundus intelligibilis.
Astronomy, in so far as we mean by the word the mere observation of the
starry heaven, may represent the former; a system of astronomy, such as
the Copernican or Newtonian, the latter. But such twisting of words is
a mere sophistical subterfuge, to avoid a difficult question, by
modifying its meaning to suit our own convenience. To be sure,
understanding and reason are employed in the cognition of phenomena;
but the question is, whether these can be applied when the object is
not a phenomenon and in this sense we regard it if it is cogitated as
given to the understanding alone, and not to the senses. The question
therefore is whether, over and above the empirical use of the
understanding, a transcendental use is possible, which applies to the
noumenon as an object. This question we have answered in the negative.

When therefore we say, the senses represent objects as they appear, the
understanding as they are, the latter statement must not be understood
in a transcendental, but only in an empirical signification, that is,
as they must be represented in the complete connection of phenomena,
and not according to what they may be, apart from their relation to
possible experience, consequently not as objects of the pure
understanding. For this must ever remain unknown to us. Nay, it is also
quite unknown to us whether any such transcendental or extraordinary
cognition is possible under any circumstances, at least, whether it is
possible by means of our categories. Understanding and sensibility,
with us, can determine objects only in conjunction. If we separate
them, we have intuitions without conceptions, or conceptions without
intuitions; in both cases, representations, which we cannot apply to
any determinate object.

If, after all our inquiries and explanations, any one still hesitates
to abandon the mere transcendental use of the categories, let him
attempt to construct with them a synthetical proposition. It would, of
course, be unnecessary for this purpose to construct an analytical
proposition, for that does not extend the sphere of the understanding,
but, being concerned only about what is cogitated in the conception
itself, it leaves it quite undecided whether the conception has any
relation to objects, or merely indicates the unity of thought—complete
abstraction being made of the modi in which an object may be given: in
such a proposition, it is sufficient for the understanding to know what
lies in the conception—to what it applies is to it indifferent. The
attempt must therefore be made with a synthetical and so-called
transcendental principle, for example: “Everything that exists, exists
as substance,” or, “Everything that is contingent exists as an effect
of some other thing, viz., of its cause.” Now I ask, whence can the
understanding draw these synthetical propositions, when the conceptions
contained therein do not relate to possible experience but to things in
themselves (noumena)? Where is to be found the third term, which is
always requisite PURE site in a synthetical proposition, which may
connect in the same proposition conceptions which have no logical
(analytical) connection with each other? The proposition never will be
demonstrated, nay, more, the possibility of any such pure assertion
never can be shown, without making reference to the empirical use of
the understanding, and thus, ipso facto, completely renouncing pure and
non-sensuous judgement. Thus the conception of pure and merely
intelligible objects is completely void of all principles of its
application, because we cannot imagine any mode in which they might be
given, and the problematical thought which leaves a place open for them
serves only, like a void space, to limit the use of empirical
principles, without containing at the same time any other object of
cognition beyond their sphere.

APPENDIX

Of the Equivocal Nature or Amphiboly of the Conceptions of Reflection
from the Confusion of the Transcendental with the Empirical use of the
Understanding.

Reflection (reflexio) is not occupied about objects themselves, for the
purpose of directly obtaining conceptions of them, but is that state of
the mind in which we set ourselves to discover the subjective
conditions under which we obtain conceptions. It is the consciousness
of the relation of given representations to the different sources or
faculties of cognition, by which alone their relation to each other can
be rightly determined. The first question which occurs in considering
our representations is to what faculty of cognition do they belong? To
the understanding or to the senses? Many judgements are admitted to be
true from mere habit or inclination; but, because reflection neither
precedes nor follows, it is held to be a judgement that has its origin
in the understanding. All judgements do not require examination, that
is, investigation into the grounds of their truth. For, when they are
immediately certain (for example: “Between two points there can be only
one straight line”), no better or less mediate test of their truth can
be found than that which they themselves contain and express. But all
judgement, nay, all comparisons require reflection, that is, a
distinction of the faculty of cognition to which the given conceptions
belong. The act whereby I compare my representations with the faculty
of cognition which originates them, and whereby I distinguish whether
they are compared with each other as belonging to the pure
understanding or to sensuous intuition, I term transcendental
reflection. Now, the relations in which conceptions can stand to each
other are those of identity and difference, agreement and opposition,
of the internal and external, finally, of the determinable and the
determining (matter and form). The proper determination of these
relations rests on the question, to what faculty of cognition they
subjectively belong, whether to sensibility or understanding? For, on
the manner in which we solve this question depends the manner in which
we must cogitate these relations.

Before constructing any objective judgement, we compare the conceptions
that are to be placed in the judgement, and observe whether there
exists identity (of many representations in one conception), if a
general judgement is to be constructed, or difference, if a particular;
whether there is agreement when affirmative; and opposition when
negative judgements are to be constructed, and so on. For this reason
we ought to call these conceptions, conceptions of comparison
(conceptus comparationis). But as, when the question is not as to the
logical form, but as to the content of conceptions, that is to say,
whether the things themselves are identical or different, in agreement
or opposition, and so on, the things can have a twofold relation to our
faculty of cognition, to wit, a relation either to sensibility or to
the understanding, and as on this relation depends their relation to
each other, transcendental reflection, that is, the relation of given
representations to one or the other faculty of cognition, can alone
determine this latter relation. Thus we shall not be able to discover
whether the things are identical or different, in agreement or
opposition, etc., from the mere conception of the things by means of
comparison (comparatio), but only by distinguishing the mode of
cognition to which they belong, in other words, by means of
transcendental reflection. We may, therefore, with justice say, that
logical reflection is mere comparison, for in it no account is taken of
the faculty of cognition to which the given conceptions belong, and
they are consequently, as far as regards their origin, to be treated as
homogeneous; while transcendental reflection (which applies to the
objects themselves) contains the ground of the possibility of objective
comparison of representations with each other, and is therefore very
different from the former, because the faculties of cognition to which
they belong are not even the same. Transcendental reflection is a duty
which no one can neglect who wishes to establish an à priori judgement
upon things. We shall now proceed to fulfil this duty, and thereby
throw not a little light on the question as to the determination of the
proper business of the understanding.

1. Identity and Difference. When an object is presented to us several
times, but always with the same internal determinations (qualitas et
quantitas), it, if an object of pure understanding, is always the same,
not several things, but only one thing (numerica identitas); but if a
phenomenon, we do not concern ourselves with comparing the conception
of the thing with the conception of some other, but, although they may
be in this respect perfectly the same, the difference of place at the
same time is a sufficient ground for asserting the numerical difference
of these objects (of sense). Thus, in the case of two drops of water,
we may make complete abstraction of all internal difference (quality
and quantity), and, the fact that they are intuited at the same time in
different places, is sufficient to justify us in holding them to be
numerically different. Leibnitz regarded phenomena as things in
themselves, consequently as intelligibilia, that is, objects of pure
understanding (although, on account of the confused nature of their
representations, he gave them the name of phenomena), and in this case
his principle of the indiscernible (principium identatis
indiscernibilium) is not to be impugned. But, as phenomena are objects
of sensibility, and, as the understanding, in respect of them, must be
employed empirically and not purely or transcendentally, plurality and
numerical difference are given by space itself as the condition of
external phenomena. For one part of space, although it may be perfectly
similar and equal to another part, is still without it, and for this
reason alone is different from the latter, which is added to it in
order to make up a greater space. It follows that this must hold good
of all things that are in the different parts of space at the same
time, however similar and equal one may be to another.

2. Agreement and Opposition. When reality is represented by the pure
understanding (realitas noumenon), opposition between realities is
incogitable—such a relation, that is, that when these realities are
connected in one subject, they annihilate the effects of each other and
may be represented in the formula 3 -3 = 0. On the other hand, the real
in a phenomenon (realitas phaenomenon) may very well be in mutual
opposition, and, when united in the same subject, the one may
completely or in part annihilate the effect or consequence of the
other; as in the case of two moving forces in the same straight line
drawing or impelling a point in opposite directions, or in the case of
a pleasure counterbalancing a certain amount of pain.

3. The Internal and External. In an object of the pure understanding,
only that is internal which has no relation (as regards its existence)
to anything different from itself. On the other hand, the internal
determinations of a substantia phaenomenon in space are nothing but
relations, and it is itself nothing more than a complex of mere
relations. Substance in space we are cognizant of only through forces
operative in it, either drawing others towards itself (attraction), or
preventing others from forcing into itself (repulsion and
impenetrability). We know no other properties that make up the
conception of substance phenomenal in space, and which we term matter.
On the other hand, as an object of the pure understanding, every
substance must have internal determination and forces. But what other
internal attributes of such an object can I think than those which my
internal sense presents to me? That, to wit, which in either itself
thought, or something analogous to it. Hence Leibnitz, who looked upon
things as noumena, after denying them everything like external
relation, and therefore also composition or combination, declared that
all substances, even the component parts of matter, were simple
substances with powers of representation, in one word, monads.

4. Matter and Form. These two conceptions lie at the foundation of all
other reflection, so inseparably are they connected with every mode of
exercising the understanding. The former denotes the determinable in
general, the second its determination, both in a transcendental sense,
abstraction being made of every difference in that which is given, and
of the mode in which it is determined. Logicians formerly termed the
universal, matter, the specific difference of this or that part of the
universal, form. In a judgement one may call the given conceptions
logical matter (for the judgement), the relation of these to each other
(by means of the copula), the form of the judgement. In an object, the
composite parts thereof (essentialia) are the matter; the mode in which
they are connected in the object, the form. In respect to things in
general, unlimited reality was regarded as the matter of all
possibility, the limitation thereof (negation) as the form, by which
one thing is distinguished from another according to transcendental
conceptions. The understanding demands that something be given (at
least in the conception), in order to be able to determine it in a
certain manner. Hence, in a conception of the pure understanding, the
matter precedes the form, and for this reason Leibnitz first assumed
the existence of things (monads) and of an internal power of
representation in them, in order to found upon this their external
relation and the community their state (that is, of their
representations). Hence, with him, space and time were possible—the
former through the relation of substances, the latter through the
connection of their determinations with each other, as causes and
effects. And so would it really be, if the pure understanding were
capable of an immediate application to objects, and if space and time
were determinations of things in themselves. But being merely sensuous
intuitions, in which we determine all objects solely as phenomena, the
form of intuition (as a subjective property of sensibility) must
antecede all matter (sensations), consequently space and time must
antecede all phenomena and all data of experience, and rather make
experience itself possible. But the intellectual philosopher could not
endure that the form should precede the things themselves and determine
their possibility; an objection perfectly correct, if we assume that we
intuite things as they are, although with confused representation. But
as sensuous intuition is a peculiar subjective condition, which is à
priori at the foundation of all perception, and the form of which is
primitive, the form must be given per se, and so far from matter (or
the things themselves which appear) lying at the foundation of
experience (as we must conclude, if we judge by mere conceptions), the
very possibility of itself presupposes, on the contrary, a given formal
intuition (space and time).

REMARK ON THE AMPHIBOLY OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF REFLECTION.

Let me be allowed to term the position which we assign to a conception
either in the sensibility or in the pure understanding, the
transcendental place. In this manner, the appointment of the position
which must be taken by each conception according to the difference in
its use, and the directions for determining this place to all
conceptions according to rules, would be a transcendental topic, a
doctrine which would thoroughly shield us from the surreptitious
devices of the pure understanding and the delusions which thence arise,
as it would always distinguish to what faculty of cognition each
conception properly belonged. Every conception, every title, under
which many cognitions rank together, may be called a logical place.
Upon this is based the logical topic of Aristotle, of which teachers
and rhetoricians could avail themselves, in order, under certain titles
of thought, to observe what would best suit the matter they had to
treat, and thus enable themselves to quibble and talk with fluency and
an appearance of profundity.

Transcendental topic, on the contrary, contains nothing more than the
above-mentioned four titles of all comparison and distinction, which
differ from categories in this respect, that they do not represent the
object according to that which constitutes its conception (quantity,
reality), but set forth merely the comparison of representations, which
precedes our conceptions of things. But this comparison requires a
previous reflection, that is, a determination of the place to which the
representations of the things which are compared belong, whether, to
wit, they are cogitated by the pure understanding, or given by
sensibility.

Conceptions may be logically compared without the trouble of inquiring
to what faculty their objects belong, whether as noumena, to the
understanding, or as phenomena, to sensibility. If, however, we wish to
employ these conceptions in respect of objects, previous transcendental
reflection is necessary. Without this reflection I should make a very
unsafe use of these conceptions, and construct pretended synthetical
propositions which critical reason cannot acknowledge and which are
based solely upon a transcendental amphiboly, that is, upon a
substitution of an object of pure understanding for a phenomenon.

For want of this doctrine of transcendental topic, and consequently
deceived by the amphiboly of the conceptions of reflection, the
celebrated Leibnitz constructed an intellectual system of the world, or
rather, believed himself competent to cognize the internal nature of
things, by comparing all objects merely with the understanding and the
abstract formal conceptions of thought. Our table of the conceptions of
reflection gives us the unexpected advantage of being able to exhibit
the distinctive peculiarities of his system in all its parts, and at
the same time of exposing the fundamental principle of this peculiar
mode of thought, which rested upon naught but a misconception. He
compared all things with each other merely by means of conceptions, and
naturally found no other differences than those by which the
understanding distinguishes its pure conceptions one from another. The
conditions of sensuous intuition, which contain in themselves their own
means of distinction, he did not look upon as primitive, because
sensibility was to him but a confused mode of representation and not
any particular source of representations. A phenomenon was for him the
representation of the thing in itself, although distinguished from
cognition by the understanding only in respect of the logical form—the
former with its usual want of analysis containing, according to him, a
certain mixture of collateral representations in its conception of a
thing, which it is the duty of the understanding to separate and
distinguish. In one word, Leibnitz intellectualized phenomena, just as
Locke, in his system of noogony (if I may be allowed to make use of
such expressions), sensualized the conceptions of the understanding,
that is to say, declared them to be nothing more than empirical or
abstract conceptions of reflection. Instead of seeking in the
understanding and sensibility two different sources of representations,
which, however, can present us with objective judgements of things only
in conjunction, each of these great men recognized but one of these
faculties, which, in their opinion, applied immediately to things in
themselves, the other having no duty but that of confusing or arranging
the representations of the former.

Accordingly, the objects of sense were compared by Leibnitz as things
in general merely in the understanding.

1st. He compares them in regard to their identity or difference—as
judged by the understanding. As, therefore, he considered merely the
conceptions of objects, and not their position in intuition, in which
alone objects can be given, and left quite out of sight the
transcendental locale of these conceptions—whether, that is, their
object ought to be classed among phenomena, or among things in
themselves, it was to be expected that he should extend the application
of the principle of indiscernibles, which is valid solely of
conceptions of things in general, to objects of sense (mundus
phaenomenon), and that he should believe that he had thereby
contributed in no small degree to extend our knowledge of nature. In
truth, if I cognize in all its inner determinations a drop of water as
a thing in itself, I cannot look upon one drop as different from
another, if the conception of the one is completely identical with that
of the other. But if it is a phenomenon in space, it has a place not
merely in the understanding (among conceptions), but also in sensuous
external intuition (in space), and in this case, the physical locale is
a matter of indifference in regard to the internal determinations of
things, and one place, B, may contain a thing which is perfectly
similar and equal to another in a place, A, just as well as if the two
things were in every respect different from each other. Difference of
place without any other conditions, makes the plurality and distinction
of objects as phenomena, not only possible in itself, but even
necessary. Consequently, the above so-called law is not a law of
nature. It is merely an analytical rule for the comparison of things by
means of mere conceptions.

2nd. The principle: “Realities (as simple affirmations) never logically
contradict each other,” is a proposition perfectly true respecting the
relation of conceptions, but, whether as regards nature, or things in
themselves (of which we have not the slightest conception), is without
any the least meaning. For real opposition, in which A -B is = 0,
exists everywhere, an opposition, that is, in which one reality united
with another in the same subject annihilates the effects of the other—a
fact which is constantly brought before our eyes by the different
antagonistic actions and operations in nature, which, nevertheless, as
depending on real forces, must be called realitates phaenomena. General
mechanics can even present us with the empirical condition of this
opposition in an à priori rule, as it directs its attention to the
opposition in the direction of forces—a condition of which the
transcendental conception of reality can tell us nothing. Although M.
Leibnitz did not announce this proposition with precisely the pomp of a
new principle, he yet employed it for the establishment of new
propositions, and his followers introduced it into their
Leibnitzio-Wolfian system of philosophy. According to this principle,
for example, all evils are but consequences of the limited nature of
created beings, that is, negations, because these are the only opposite
of reality. (In the mere conception of a thing in general this is
really the case, but not in things as phenomena.) In like manner, the
upholders of this system deem it not only possible, but natural also,
to connect and unite all reality in one being, because they acknowledge
no other sort of opposition than that of contradiction (by which the
conception itself of a thing is annihilated), and find themselves
unable to conceive an opposition of reciprocal destruction, so to
speak, in which one real cause destroys the effect of another, and the
conditions of whose representation we meet with only in sensibility.

3rd. The Leibnitzian monadology has really no better foundation than on
this philosopher’s mode of falsely representing the difference of the
internal and external solely in relation to the understanding.
Substances, in general, must have something inward, which is therefore
free from external relations, consequently from that of composition
also. The simple—that which can be represented by a unit—is therefore
the foundation of that which is internal in things in themselves. The
internal state of substances cannot therefore consist in place, shape,
contact, or motion, determinations which are all external relations,
and we can ascribe to them no other than that whereby we internally
determine our faculty of sense itself, that is to say, the state of
representation. Thus, then, were constructed the monads, which were to
form the elements of the universe, the active force of which consists
in representation, the effects of this force being thus entirely
confined to themselves.

For the same reason, his view of the possible community of substances
could not represent it but as a predetermined harmony, and by no means
as a physical influence. For inasmuch as everything is occupied only
internally, that is, with its own representations, the state of the
representations of one substance could not stand in active and living
connection with that of another, but some third cause operating on all
without exception was necessary to make the different states correspond
with one another. And this did not happen by means of assistance
applied in each particular case (systema assistentiae), but through the
unity of the idea of a cause occupied and connected with all
substances, in which they necessarily receive, according to the
Leibnitzian school, their existence and permanence, consequently also
reciprocal correspondence, according to universal laws.

4th. This philosopher’s celebrated doctrine of space and time, in which
he intellectualized these forms of sensibility, originated in the same
delusion of transcendental reflection. If I attempt to represent by the
mere understanding, the external relations of things, I can do so only
by employing the conception of their reciprocal action, and if I wish
to connect one state of the same thing with another state, I must avail
myself of the notion of the order of cause and effect. And thus
Leibnitz regarded space as a certain order in the community of
substances, and time as the dynamical sequence of their states. That
which space and time possess proper to themselves and independent of
things, he ascribed to a necessary confusion in our conceptions of
them, whereby that which is a mere form of dynamical relations is held
to be a self-existent intuition, antecedent even to things themselves.
Thus space and time were the intelligible form of the connection of
things (substances and their states) in themselves. But things were
intelligible substances (substantiae noumena). At the same time, he
made these conceptions valid of phenomena, because he did not allow to
sensibility a peculiar mode of intuition, but sought all, even the
empirical representation of objects, in the understanding, and left to
sense naught but the despicable task of confusing and disarranging the
representations of the former.

But even if we could frame any synthetical proposition concerning
things in themselves by means of the pure understanding (which is
impossible), it could not apply to phenomena, which do not represent
things in themselves. In such a case I should be obliged in
transcendental reflection to compare my conceptions only under the
conditions of sensibility, and so space and time would not be
determinations of things in themselves, but of phenomena. What things
may be in themselves, I know not and need not know, because a thing is
never presented to me otherwise than as a phenomenon.

I must adopt the same mode of procedure with the other conceptions of
reflection. Matter is substantia phaenomenon. That in it which is
internal I seek to discover in all parts of space which it occupies,
and in all the functions and operations it performs, and which are
indeed never anything but phenomena of the external sense. I cannot
therefore find anything that is absolutely, but only what is
comparatively internal, and which itself consists of external
relations. The absolutely internal in matter, and as it should be
according to the pure understanding, is a mere chimera, for matter is
not an object for the pure understanding. But the transcendental
object, which is the foundation of the phenomenon which we call matter,
is a mere nescio quid, the nature of which we could not understand,
even though someone were found able to tell us. For we can understand
nothing that does not bring with it something in intuition
corresponding to the expressions employed. If, by the complaint of
being unable to perceive the internal nature of things, it is meant
that we do not comprehend by the pure understanding what the things
which appear to us may be in themselves, it is a silly and unreasonable
complaint; for those who talk thus really desire that we should be able
to cognize, consequently to intuite, things without senses, and
therefore wish that we possessed a faculty of cognition perfectly
different from the human faculty, not merely in degree, but even as
regards intuition and the mode thereof, so that thus we should not be
men, but belong to a class of beings, the possibility of whose
existence, much less their nature and constitution, we have no means of
cognizing. By observation and analysis of phenomena we penetrate into
the interior of nature, and no one can say what progress this knowledge
may make in time. But those transcendental questions which pass beyond
the limits of nature, we could never answer, even although all nature
were laid open to us, because we have not the power of observing our
own mind with any other intuition than that of our internal sense. For
herein lies the mystery of the origin and source of our faculty of
sensibility. Its application to an object, and the transcendental
ground of this unity of subjective and objective, lie too deeply
concealed for us, who cognize ourselves only through the internal
sense, consequently as phenomena, to be able to discover in our
existence anything but phenomena, the non-sensuous cause of which we at
the same time earnestly desire to penetrate to.

The great utility of this critique of conclusions arrived at by the
processes of mere reflection consists in its clear demonstration of the
nullity of all conclusions respecting objects which are compared with
each other in the understanding alone, while it at the same time
confirms what we particularly insisted on, namely, that, although
phenomena are not included as things in themselves among the objects of
the pure understanding, they are nevertheless the only things by which
our cognition can possess objective reality, that is to say, which give
us intuitions to correspond with our conceptions.

When we reflect in a purely logical manner, we do nothing more than
compare conceptions in our understanding, to discover whether both have
the same content, whether they are self-contradictory or not, whether
anything is contained in either conception, which of the two is given,
and which is merely a mode of thinking that given. But if I apply these
conceptions to an object in general (in the transcendental sense),
without first determining whether it is an object of sensuous or
intellectual intuition, certain limitations present themselves, which
forbid us to pass beyond the conceptions and render all empirical use
of them impossible. And thus these limitations prove that the
representation of an object as a thing in general is not only
insufficient, but, without sensuous determination and independently of
empirical conditions, self-contradictory; that we must therefore make
abstraction of all objects, as in logic, or, admitting them, must think
them under conditions of sensuous intuition; that, consequently, the
intelligible requires an altogether peculiar intuition, which we do not
possess, and in the absence of which it is for us nothing; while, on
the other hand phenomena cannot be objects in themselves. For, when I
merely think things in general, the difference in their external
relations cannot constitute a difference in the things themselves; on
the contrary, the former presupposes the latter, and if the conception
of one of two things is not internally different from that of the
other, I am merely thinking the same thing in different relations.
Further, by the addition of one affirmation (reality) to the other, the
positive therein is really augmented, and nothing is abstracted or
withdrawn from it; hence the real in things cannot be in contradiction
with or opposition to itself—and so on.

The true use of the conceptions of reflection in the employment of the
understanding has, as we have shown, been so misconceived by Leibnitz,
one of the most acute philosophers of either ancient or modern times,
that he has been misled into the construction of a baseless system of
intellectual cognition, which professes to determine its objects
without the intervention of the senses. For this reason, the exposition
of the cause of the amphiboly of these conceptions, as the origin of
these false principles, is of great utility in determining with
certainty the proper limits of the understanding.

It is right to say whatever is affirmed or denied of the whole of a
conception can be affirmed or denied of any part of it (dictum de omni
et nullo); but it would be absurd so to alter this logical proposition
as to say whatever is not contained in a general conception is likewise
not contained in the particular conceptions which rank under it; for
the latter are particular conceptions, for the very reason that their
content is greater than that which is cogitated in the general
conception. And yet the whole intellectual system of Leibnitz is based
upon this false principle, and with it must necessarily fall to the
ground, together with all the ambiguous principles in reference to the
employment of the understanding which have thence originated.

Leibnitz’s principle of the identity of indiscernibles or
indistinguishables is really based on the presupposition that, if in
the conception of a thing a certain distinction is not to be found, it
is also not to be met with in things themselves; that, consequently,
all things are completely identical (numero eadem) which are not
distinguishable from each other (as to quality or quantity) in our
conceptions of them. But, as in the mere conception of anything
abstraction has been made of many necessary conditions of intuition,
that of which abstraction has been made is rashly held to be
non-existent, and nothing is attributed to the thing but what is
contained in its conception.

The conception of a cubic foot of space, however I may think it,
is in itself completely identical. But two cubic feet in space are
nevertheless distinct from each other from the sole fact of their
being in different places (they are numero diversa); and these places
are conditions of intuition, wherein the object of this conception is
given, and which do not belong to the conception, but to the faculty
of sensibility. In like manner, there is in the conception of a thing
no contradiction when a negative is not connected with an affirmative;
and merely affirmative conceptions cannot, in conjunction, produce any
negation. But in sensuous intuition, wherein reality (take for example,
motion) is given, we find conditions (opposite directions)—of which
abstraction has been made in the conception of motion in general—which
render possible a contradiction or opposition (not indeed of a logical
kind)—and which from pure positives produce zero = 0. We are therefore
not justified in saying that all reality is in perfect agreement
and harmony, because no contradiction is discoverable among its
conceptions.[39] According to mere conceptions, that which is internal
is the substratum of all relations or external determinations. When,
therefore, I abstract all conditions of intuition, and confine myself
solely to the conception of a thing in general, I can make abstraction
of all external relations, and there must nevertheless remain a
conception of that which indicates no relation, but merely internal
determinations. Now it seems to follow that in everything (substance)
there is something which is absolutely internal and which antecedes
all external determinations, inasmuch as it renders them possible; and
that therefore this substratum is something which does not contain any
external relations and is consequently simple (for corporeal things
are never anything but relations, at least of their parts external to
each other); and, inasmuch as we know of no other absolutely internal
determinations than those of the internal sense, this substratum is not
only simple, but also, analogously with our internal sense, determined
through representations, that is to say, all things are properly
monads, or simple beings endowed with the power of representation. Now
all this would be perfectly correct, if the conception of a thing were
the only necessary condition of the presentation of objects of external
intuition. It is, on the contrary, manifest that a permanent phenomenon
in space (impenetrable extension) can contain mere relations, and
nothing that is absolutely internal, and yet be the primary substratum
of all external perception. By mere conceptions I cannot think anything
external, without, at the same time, thinking something internal, for
the reason that conceptions of relations presuppose given things,
and without these are impossible. But, as an intuition there is
something (that is, space, which, with all it contains, consists of
purely formal, or, indeed, real relations) which is not found in the
mere conception of a thing in general, and this presents to us the
substratum which could not be cognized through conceptions alone, I
cannot say: because a thing cannot be represented by mere conceptions
without something absolutely internal, there is also, in the things
themselves which are contained under these conceptions, and in their
intuition nothing external to which something absolutely internal does
not serve as the foundation. For, when we have made abstraction of
all the conditions of intuition, there certainly remains in the mere
conception nothing but the internal in general, through which alone
the external is possible. But this necessity, which is grounded upon
abstraction alone, does not obtain in the case of things themselves,
in so far as they are given in intuition with such determinations as
express mere relations, without having anything internal as their
foundation; for they are not things in themselves, but only phenomena.
What we cognize in matter is nothing but relations (what we call its
internal determinations are but comparatively internal). But there are
some self-subsistent and permanent, through which a determined object
is given. That I, when abstraction is made of these relations, have
nothing more to think, does not destroy the conception of a thing as
phenomenon, nor the conception of an object in abstracto, but it does
away with the possibility of an object that is determinable according
to mere conceptions, that is, of a noumenon. It is certainly startling
to hear that a thing consists solely of relations; but this thing is
simply a phenomenon, and cannot be cogitated by means of the mere
categories: it does itself consist in the mere relation of something in
general to the senses. In the same way, we cannot cogitate relations
of things in abstracto, if we commence with conceptions alone, in any
other manner than that one is the cause of determinations in the other;
for that is itself the conception of the understanding or category of
relation. But, as in this case we make abstraction of all intuition, we
lose altogether the mode in which the manifold determines to each of
its parts its place, that is, the form of sensibility (space); and yet
this mode antecedes all empirical causality.

 [39] If any one wishes here to have recourse to the usual subterfuge,
 and to say, that at least realitates noumena cannot be in opposition
 to each other, it will be requisite for him to adduce an example of
 this pure and non-sensuous reality, that it may be understood whether
 the notion represents something or nothing. But an example cannot be
 found except in experience, which never presents to us anything more
 than phenomena; and thus the proposition means nothing more than that
 the conception which contains only affirmatives does not contain
 anything negative—a proposition nobody ever doubted.

If by intelligible objects we understand things which can be thought
by means of the pure categories, without the need of the schemata of
sensibility, such objects are impossible. For the condition of the
objective use of all our conceptions of understanding is the mode of
our sensuous intuition, whereby objects are given; and, if we make
abstraction of the latter, the former can have no relation to an
object. And even if we should suppose a different kind of intuition
from our own, still our functions of thought would have no use or
signification in respect thereof. But if we understand by the term,
objects of a non-sensuous intuition, in respect of which our categories
are not valid, and of which we can accordingly have no knowledge
(neither intuition nor conception), in this merely negative sense
noumena must be admitted. For this is no more than saying that our
mode of intuition is not applicable to all things, but only to objects
of our senses, that consequently its objective validity is limited,
and that room is therefore left for another kind of intuition, and
thus also for things that may be objects of it. But in this sense the
conception of a noumenon is problematical, that is to say, it is the
notion of a thing of which we can neither say that it is possible,
nor that it is impossible, inasmuch as we do not know of any mode of
intuition besides the sensuous, or of any other sort of conceptions
than the categories—a mode of intuition and a kind of conception
neither of which is applicable to a non-sensuous object. We are on this
account incompetent to extend the sphere of our objects of thought
beyond the conditions of our sensibility, and to assume the existence
of objects of pure thought, that is, of noumena, inasmuch as these
have no true positive signification. For it must be confessed of the
categories that they are not of themselves sufficient for the cognition
of things in themselves and, without the data of sensibility, are
mere subjective forms of the unity of the understanding. Thought is
certainly not a product of the senses, and in so far is not limited
by them, but it does not therefore follow that it may be employed
purely and without the intervention of sensibility, for it would then
be without reference to an object. And we cannot call a noumenon
an object of pure thought; for the representation thereof is but
the problematical conception of an object for a perfectly different
intuition and a perfectly different understanding from ours, both of
which are consequently themselves problematical. The conception of a
noumenon is therefore not the conception of an object, but merely a
problematical conception inseparably connected with the limitation
of our sensibility. That is to say, this conception contains the
answer to the question: “Are there objects quite unconnected with,
and independent of, our intuition?”—a question to which only an
indeterminate answer can be given. That answer is: “Inasmuch as
sensuous intuition does not apply to all things without distinction,
there remains room for other and different objects.” The existence of
these problematical objects is therefore not absolutely denied, in the
absence of a determinate conception of them, but, as no category is
valid in respect of them, neither must they be admitted as objects for
our understanding.

Understanding accordingly limits sensibility, without at the same time
enlarging its own field. While, moreover, it forbids sensibility to
apply its forms and modes to things in themselves and restricts it to
the sphere of phenomena, it cogitates an object in itself, only,
however, as a transcendental object, which is the cause of a phenomenon
(consequently not itself a phenomenon), and which cannot be thought
either as a quantity or as reality, or as substance (because these
conceptions always require sensuous forms in which to determine an
object)—an object, therefore, of which we are quite unable to say
whether it can be met with in ourselves or out of us, whether it would
be annihilated together with sensibility, or, if this were taken away,
would continue to exist. If we wish to call this object a noumenon,
because the representation of it is non-sensuous, we are at liberty to
do so. But as we can apply to it none of the conceptions of our
understanding, the representation is for us quite void, and is
available only for the indication of the limits of our sensuous
intuition, thereby leaving at the same time an empty space, which we
are competent to fill by the aid neither of possible experience, nor of
the pure understanding.

The critique of the pure understanding, accordingly, does not permit us
to create for ourselves a new field of objects beyond those which are
presented to us as phenomena, and to stray into intelligible worlds;
nay, it does not even allow us to endeavour to form so much as a
conception of them. The specious error which leads to this—and which is
a perfectly excusable one—lies in the fact that the employment of the
understanding, contrary to its proper purpose and destination, is made
transcendental, and objects, that is, possible intuitions, are made to
regulate themselves according to conceptions, instead of the
conceptions arranging themselves according to the intuitions, on which
alone their own objective validity rests. Now the reason of this again
is that apperception, and with it thought, antecedes all possible
determinate arrangement of representations. Accordingly we think
something in general and determine it on the one hand sensuously, but,
on the other, distinguish the general and in abstracto represented
object from this particular mode of intuiting it. In this case there
remains a mode of determining the object by mere thought, which is
really but a logical form without content, which, however, seems to us
to be a mode of the existence of the object in itself (noumenon),
without regard to intuition which is limited to our senses.

Before ending this transcendental analytic, we must make an addition,
which, although in itself of no particular importance, seems to be
necessary to the completeness of the system. The highest conception,
with which a transcendental philosophy commonly begins, is the division
into possible and impossible. But as all division presupposes a divided
conception, a still higher one must exist, and this is the conception
of an object in general—problematically understood and without its
being decided whether it is something or nothing. As the categories are
the only conceptions which apply to objects in general, the
distinguishing of an object, whether it is something or nothing, must
proceed according to the order and direction of the categories.

1. To the categories of quantity, that is, the conceptions of all,
many, and one, the conception which annihilates all, that is, the
conception of none, is opposed. And thus the object of a conception, to
which no intuition can be found to correspond, is = nothing. That is,
it is a conception without an object (ens rationis), like noumena,
which cannot be considered possible in the sphere of reality, though
they must not therefore be held to be impossible—or like certain new
fundamental forces in matter, the existence of which is cogitable
without contradiction, though, as examples from experience are not
forthcoming, they must not be regarded as possible.

2. Reality is something; negation is nothing, that is, a conception of
the absence of an object, as cold, a shadow (nihil privativum).

3. The mere form of intuition, without substance, is in itself no
object, but the merely formal condition of an object (as phenomenon),
as pure space and pure time. These are certainly something, as forms of
intuition, but are not themselves objects which are intuited (ens
imaginarium).

4. The object of a conception which is self-contradictory, is nothing,
because the conception is nothing—is impossible, as a figure composed
of two straight lines (nihil negativum).

The table of this division of the conception of nothing (the
corresponding division of the conception of something does not require
special description) must therefore be arranged as follows:

                      NOTHING
                        AS

                        1
                As Empty Conception
                 without object,
                  _ens rationis_
           2                               3
     Empty object of               Empty intuition
      a conception,                without object,
     _nihil privativum_            _ens imaginarium_
                        4
                   Empty object
                 without conception,
                  _nihil negativum_

We see that the ens rationis is distinguished from the nihil negativum
or pure nothing by the consideration that the former must not be
reckoned among possibilities, because it is a mere fiction—though not
self-contradictory, while the latter is completely opposed to all
possibility, inasmuch as the conception annihilates itself. Both,
however, are empty conceptions. On the other hand, the nihil privativum
and ens imaginarium are empty data for conceptions. If light be not
given to the senses, we cannot represent to ourselves darkness, and if
extended objects are not perceived, we cannot represent space. Neither
the negation, nor the mere form of intuition can, without something
real, be an object.

SECOND DIVISION—TRANSCENDENTAL LOGIC

TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC.
INTRODUCTION.

I. Of Transcendental Illusory Appearance

We termed dialectic in general a logic of appearance. This does not
signify a doctrine of probability; for probability is truth, only
cognized upon insufficient grounds, and though the information it
gives us is imperfect, it is not therefore deceitful. Hence it must
not be separated from the analytical part of logic. Still less must
phenomenon and appearance be held to be identical. For truth or
illusory appearance does not reside in the object, in so far as it
is intuited, but in the judgement upon the object, in so far as it
is thought. It is, therefore, quite correct to say that the senses
do not err, not because they always judge correctly, but because
they do not judge at all. Hence truth and error, consequently also,
illusory appearance as the cause of error, are only to be found in a
judgement, that is, in the relation of an object to our understanding.
In a cognition which completely harmonizes with the laws of the
understanding, no error can exist. In a representation of the senses—as
not containing any judgement—there is also no error. But no power of
nature can of itself deviate from its own laws. Hence neither the
understanding per se (without the influence of another cause), nor the
senses per se, would fall into error; the former could not, because,
if it acts only according to its own laws, the effect (the judgement)
must necessarily accord with these laws. But in accordance with the
laws of the understanding consists the formal element in all truth. In
the senses there is no judgement—neither a true nor a false one. But,
as we have no source of cognition besides these two, it follows that
error is caused solely by the unobserved influence of the sensibility
upon the understanding. And thus it happens that the subjective grounds
of a judgement blend and are confounded with the objective, and cause
them to deviate from their proper determination,[40] just as a body
in motion would always of itself proceed in a straight line, but if
another impetus gives to it a different direction, it will then start
off into a curvilinear line of motion. To distinguish the peculiar
action of the understanding from the power which mingles with it,
it is necessary to consider an erroneous judgement as the diagonal
between two forces, that determine the judgement in two different
directions, which, as it were, form an angle, and to resolve this
composite operation into the simple ones of the understanding and the
sensibility. In pure à priori judgements this must be done by means of
transcendental reflection, whereby, as has been already shown, each
representation has its place appointed in the corresponding faculty of
cognition, and consequently the influence of the one faculty upon the
other is made apparent.

 [40] Sensibility, subjected to the understanding, as the object upon
 which the understanding employs its functions, is the source of real
 cognitions. But, in so far as it exercises an influence upon the
 action of the understanding and determines it to judgement,
 sensibility is itself the cause of error.

It is not at present our business to treat of empirical illusory
appearance (for example, optical illusion), which occurs in the
empirical application of otherwise correct rules of the understanding,
and in which the judgement is misled by the influence of imagination.
Our purpose is to speak of transcendental illusory appearance, which
influences principles—that are not even applied to experience, for in
this case we should possess a sure test of their correctness—but which
leads us, in disregard of all the warnings of criticism, completely
beyond the empirical employment of the categories and deludes us with
the chimera of an extension of the sphere of the pure understanding. We
shall term those principles the application of which is confined
entirely within the limits of possible experience, immanent; those, on
the other hand, which transgress these limits, we shall call
transcendent principles. But by these latter I do not understand
principles of the transcendental use or misuse of the categories, which
is in reality a mere fault of the judgement when not under due
restraint from criticism, and therefore not paying sufficient attention
to the limits of the sphere in which the pure understanding is allowed
to exercise its functions; but real principles which exhort us to break
down all those barriers, and to lay claim to a perfectly new field of
cognition, which recognizes no line of demarcation. Thus transcendental
and transcendent are not identical terms. The principles of the pure
understanding, which we have already propounded, ought to be of
empirical and not of transcendental use, that is, they are not
applicable to any object beyond the sphere of experience. A principle
which removes these limits, nay, which authorizes us to overstep them,
is called transcendent. If our criticism can succeed in exposing the
illusion in these pretended principles, those which are limited in
their employment to the sphere of experience may be called, in
opposition to the others, immanent principles of the pure
understanding.

Logical illusion, which consists merely in the imitation of the form of
reason (the illusion in sophistical syllogisms), arises entirely from a
want of due attention to logical rules. So soon as the attention is
awakened to the case before us, this illusion totally disappears.
Transcendental illusion, on the contrary, does not cease to exist, even
after it has been exposed, and its nothingness clearly perceived by
means of transcendental criticism. Take, for example, the illusion in
the proposition: “The world must have a beginning in time.” The cause
of this is as follows. In our reason, subjectively considered as a
faculty of human cognition, there exist fundamental rules and maxims of
its exercise, which have completely the appearance of objective
principles. Now from this cause it happens that the subjective
necessity of a certain connection of our conceptions, is regarded as an
objective necessity of the determination of things in themselves. This
illusion it is impossible to avoid, just as we cannot avoid perceiving
that the sea appears to be higher at a distance than it is near the
shore, because we see the former by means of higher rays than the
latter, or, which is a still stronger case, as even the astronomer
cannot prevent himself from seeing the moon larger at its rising than
some time afterwards, although he is not deceived by this illusion.

Transcendental dialectic will therefore content itself with exposing
the illusory appearance in transcendental judgements, and guarding us
against it; but to make it, as in the case of logical illusion,
entirely disappear and cease to be illusion is utterly beyond its
power. For we have here to do with a natural and unavoidable illusion,
which rests upon subjective principles and imposes these upon us as
objective, while logical dialectic, in the detection of sophisms, has
to do merely with an error in the logical consequence of the
propositions, or with an artificially constructed illusion, in
imitation of the natural error. There is, therefore, a natural and
unavoidable dialectic of pure reason—not that in which the bungler,
from want of the requisite knowledge, involves himself, nor that which
the sophist devises for the purpose of misleading, but that which is an
inseparable adjunct of human reason, and which, even after its
illusions have been exposed, does not cease to deceive, and continually
to lead reason into momentary errors, which it becomes necessary
continually to remove.

II. Of Pure Reason as the Seat of Transcendental Illusory Appearance

A. OF REASON IN GENERAL.

All our knowledge begins with sense, proceeds thence to understanding,
and ends with reason, beyond which nothing higher can be discovered in
the human mind for elaborating the matter of intuition and subjecting
it to the highest unity of thought. At this stage of our inquiry it is
my duty to give an explanation of this, the highest faculty of
cognition, and I confess I find myself here in some difficulty. Of
reason, as of the understanding, there is a merely formal, that is,
logical use, in which it makes abstraction of all content of cognition;
but there is also a real use, inasmuch as it contains in itself the
source of certain conceptions and principles, which it does not borrow
either from the senses or the understanding. The former faculty has
been long defined by logicians as the faculty of mediate conclusion in
contradistinction to immediate conclusions (consequentiae immediatae);
but the nature of the latter, which itself generates conceptions, is
not to be understood from this definition. Now as a division of reason
into a logical and a transcendental faculty presents itself here, it
becomes necessary to seek for a higher conception of this source of
cognition which shall comprehend both conceptions. In this we may
expect, according to the analogy of the conceptions of the
understanding, that the logical conception will give us the key to the
transcendental, and that the table of the functions of the former will
present us with the clue to the conceptions of reason.

In the former part of our transcendental logic, we defined the
understanding to be the faculty of rules; reason may be distinguished
from understanding as the faculty of principles.

The term principle is ambiguous, and commonly signifies merely a
cognition that may be employed as a principle, although it is not in
itself, and as regards its proper origin, entitled to the distinction.
Every general proposition, even if derived from experience by the
process of induction, may serve as the major in a syllogism; but it is
not for that reason a principle. Mathematical axioms (for example,
there can be only one straight line between two points) are general à
priori cognitions, and are therefore rightly denominated principles,
relatively to the cases which can be subsumed under them. But I cannot
for this reason say that I cognize this property of a straight line
from principles—I cognize it only in pure intuition.

Cognition from principles, then, is that cognition in which I cognize
the particular in the general by means of conceptions. Thus every
syllogism is a form of the deduction of a cognition from a principle.
For the major always gives a conception, through which everything that
is subsumed under the condition thereof is cognized according to a
principle. Now as every general cognition may serve as the major in a
syllogism, and the understanding presents us with such general à priori
propositions, they may be termed principles, in respect of their
possible use.

But if we consider these principles of the pure understanding in
relation to their origin, we shall find them to be anything rather than
cognitions from conceptions. For they would not even be possible à
priori, if we could not rely on the assistance of pure intuition (in
mathematics), or on that of the conditions of a possible experience.
That everything that happens has a cause, cannot be concluded from the
general conception of that which happens; on the contrary the principle
of causality instructs us as to the mode of obtaining from that which
happens a determinate empirical conception.

Synthetical cognitions from conceptions the understanding cannot
supply, and they alone are entitled to be called principles. At the
same time, all general propositions may be termed comparative
principles.

It has been a long-cherished wish—that (who knows how late), may one
day, be happily accomplished—that the principles of the endless variety
of civil laws should be investigated and exposed; for in this way alone
can we find the secret of simplifying legislation. But in this case,
laws are nothing more than limitations of our freedom upon conditions
under which it subsists in perfect harmony with itself; they
consequently have for their object that which is completely our own
work, and of which we ourselves may be the cause by means of these
conceptions. But how objects as things in themselves—how the nature of
things is subordinated to principles and is to be determined, according
to conceptions, is a question which it seems well nigh impossible to
answer. Be this, however, as it may—for on this point our investigation
is yet to be made—it is at least manifest from what we have said that
cognition from principles is something very different from cognition by
means of the understanding, which may indeed precede other cognitions
in the form of a principle, but in itself—in so far as it is
synthetical—is neither based upon mere thought, nor contains a general
proposition drawn from conceptions alone.

The understanding may be a faculty for the production of unity of
phenomena by virtue of rules; the reason is a faculty for the
production of unity of rules (of the understanding) under principles.
Reason, therefore, never applies directly to experience, or to any
sensuous object; its object is, on the contrary, the understanding, to
the manifold cognition of which it gives a unity à priori by means of
conceptions—a unity which may be called rational unity, and which is of
a nature very different from that of the unity produced by the
understanding.

The above is the general conception of the faculty of reason, in so far
as it has been possible to make it comprehensible in the absence of
examples. These will be given in the sequel.

B. OF THE LOGICAL USE OF REASON.

A distinction is commonly made between that which is immediately
cognized and that which is inferred or concluded. That in a figure
which is bounded by three straight lines there are three angles, is an
immediate cognition; but that these angles are together equal to two
right angles, is an inference or conclusion. Now, as we are constantly
employing this mode of thought and have thus become quite accustomed to
it, we no longer remark the above distinction, and, as in the case of
the so-called deceptions of sense, consider as immediately perceived,
what has really been inferred. In every reasoning or syllogism, there
is a fundamental proposition, afterwards a second drawn from it, and
finally the conclusion, which connects the truth in the first with the
truth in the second—and that infallibly. If the judgement concluded is
so contained in the first proposition that it can be deduced from it
without the meditation of a third notion, the conclusion is called
immediate (consequentia immediata); I prefer the term conclusion of the
understanding. But if, in addition to the fundamental cognition, a
second judgement is necessary for the production of the conclusion, it
is called a conclusion of the reason. In the proposition: All men are
mortal, are contained the propositions: Some men are mortal, Nothing
that is not mortal is a man, and these are therefore immediate
conclusions from the first. On the other hand, the proposition: all the
learned are mortal, is not contained in the main proposition (for the
conception of a learned man does not occur in it), and it can be
deduced from the main proposition only by means of a mediating
judgement.

In every syllogism I first cogitate a rule (the major) by means of the
understanding. In the next place I subsume a cognition under the
condition of the rule (and this is the minor) by means of the
judgement. And finally I determine my cognition by means of the
predicate of the rule (this is the conclusio), consequently, I
determine it à priori by means of the reason. The relations, therefore,
which the major proposition, as the rule, represents between a
cognition and its condition, constitute the different kinds of
syllogisms. These are just threefold—analogously with all judgements,
in so far as they differ in the mode of expressing the relation of a
cognition in the understanding—namely, categorical, hypothetical, and
disjunctive.

When as often happens, the conclusion is a judgement which may follow
from other given judgements, through which a perfectly different object
is cogitated, I endeavour to discover in the understanding whether the
assertion in this conclusion does not stand under certain conditions
according to a general rule. If I find such a condition, and if the
object mentioned in the conclusion can be subsumed under the given
condition, then this conclusion follows from a rule which is also valid
for other objects of cognition. From this we see that reason endeavours
to subject the great variety of the cognitions of the understanding to
the smallest possible number of principles (general conditions), and
thus to produce in it the highest unity.

C. OF THE PURE USE OF REASON.

Can we isolate reason, and, if so, is it in this case a peculiar source
of conceptions and judgements which spring from it alone, and through
which it can be applied to objects; or is it merely a subordinate
faculty, whose duty it is to give a certain form to given cognitions—a
form which is called logical, and through which the cognitions of the
understanding are subordinated to each other, and lower rules to higher
(those, to wit, whose condition comprises in its sphere the condition
of the others), in so far as this can be done by comparison? This is
the question which we have at present to answer. Manifold variety of
rules and unity of principles is a requirement of reason, for the
purpose of bringing the understanding into complete accordance with
itself, just as understanding subjects the manifold content of
intuition to conceptions, and thereby introduces connection into it.
But this principle prescribes no law to objects, and does not contain
any ground of the possibility of cognizing or of determining them as
such, but is merely a subjective law for the proper arrangement of the
content of the understanding. The purpose of this law is, by a
comparison of the conceptions of the understanding, to reduce them to
the smallest possible number, although, at the same time, it does not
justify us in demanding from objects themselves such a uniformity as
might contribute to the convenience and the enlargement of the sphere
of the understanding, or in expecting that it will itself thus receive
from them objective validity. In one word, the question is: “does
reason in itself, that is, does pure reason contain à priori
synthetical principles and rules, and what are those principles?”

The formal and logical procedure of reason in syllogisms gives us
sufficient information in regard to the ground on which the
transcendental principle of reason in its pure synthetical cognition
will rest.

1. Reason, as observed in the syllogistic process, is not applicable to
intuitions, for the purpose of subjecting them to rules—for this is the
province of the understanding with its categories—but to conceptions
and judgements. If pure reason does apply to objects and the intuition
of them, it does so not immediately, but mediately—through the
understanding and its judgements, which have a direct relation to the
senses and their intuition, for the purpose of determining their
objects. The unity of reason is therefore not the unity of a possible
experience, but is essentially different from this unity, which is that
of the understanding. That everything which happens has a cause, is not
a principle cognized and prescribed by reason. This principle makes the
unity of experience possible and borrows nothing from reason, which,
without a reference to possible experience, could never have produced
by means of mere conceptions any such synthetical unity.

2. Reason, in its logical use, endeavours to discover the general
condition of its judgement (the conclusion), and a syllogism is itself
nothing but a judgement by means of the subsumption of its condition
under a general rule (the major). Now as this rule may itself be
subjected to the same process of reason, and thus the condition of the
condition be sought (by means of a prosyllogism) as long as the process
can be continued, it is very manifest that the peculiar principle of
reason in its logical use is to find for the conditioned cognition of
the understanding the unconditioned whereby the unity of the former is
completed.

But this logical maxim cannot be a principle of pure reason, unless we
admit that, if the conditioned is given, the whole series of conditions
subordinated to one another—a series which is consequently itself
unconditioned—is also given, that is, contained in the object and its
connection.

But this principle of pure reason is evidently synthetical; for,
analytically, the conditioned certainly relates to some condition, but
not to the unconditioned. From this principle also there must originate
different synthetical propositions, of which the pure understanding is
perfectly ignorant, for it has to do only with objects of a possible
experience, the cognition and synthesis of which is always conditioned.
The unconditioned, if it does really exist, must be especially
considered in regard to the determinations which distinguish it from
whatever is conditioned, and will thus afford us material for many à
priori synthetical propositions.

The principles resulting from this highest principle of pure reason
will, however, be transcendent in relation to phenomena, that is to
say, it will be impossible to make any adequate empirical use of this
principle. It is therefore completely different from all principles of
the understanding, the use made of which is entirely immanent, their
object and purpose being merely the possibility of experience. Now our
duty in the transcendental dialectic is as follows. To discover whether
the principle that the series of conditions (in the synthesis of
phenomena, or of thought in general) extends to the unconditioned is
objectively true, or not; what consequences result therefrom affecting
the empirical use of the understanding, or rather whether there exists
any such objectively valid proposition of reason, and whether it is
not, on the contrary, a merely logical precept which directs us to
ascend perpetually to still higher conditions, to approach completeness
in the series of them, and thus to introduce into our cognition the
highest possible unity of reason. We must ascertain, I say, whether
this requirement of reason has not been regarded, by a
misunderstanding, as a transcendental principle of pure reason, which
postulates a thorough completeness in the series of conditions in
objects themselves. We must show, moreover, the misconceptions and
illusions that intrude into syllogisms, the major proposition of which
pure reason has supplied—a proposition which has perhaps more of the
character of a petitio than of a postulatum—and that proceed from
experience upwards to its conditions. The solution of these problems is
our task in transcendental dialectic, which we are about to expose even
at its source, that lies deep in human reason. We shall divide it into
two parts, the first of which will treat of the transcendent
conceptions of pure reason, the second of transcendent and dialectical
syllogisms.

TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC—BOOK I—OF THE CONCEPTIONS OF PURE REASON.

The conceptions of pure reason—we do not here speak of the possibility
of them—are not obtained by reflection, but by inference or conclusion.
The conceptions of understanding are also cogitated à priori
antecedently to experience, and render it possible; but they contain
nothing but the unity of reflection upon phenomena, in so far as these
must necessarily belong to a possible empirical consciousness. Through
them alone are cognition and the determination of an object possible.
It is from them, accordingly, that we receive material for reasoning,
and antecedently to them we possess no à priori conceptions of objects
from which they might be deduced, On the other hand, the sole basis of
their objective reality consists in the necessity imposed on them, as
containing the intellectual form of all experience, of restricting
their application and influence to the sphere of experience.

But the term, conception of reason, or rational conception, itself
indicates that it does not confine itself within the limits of
experience, because its object-matter is a cognition, of which every
empirical cognition is but a part—nay, the whole of possible experience
may be itself but a part of it—a cognition to which no actual
experience ever fully attains, although it does always pertain to it.
The aim of rational conceptions is the comprehension, as that of the
conceptions of understanding is the understanding of perceptions. If
they contain the unconditioned, they relate to that to which all
experience is subordinate, but which is never itself an object of
experience—that towards which reason tends in all its conclusions from
experience, and by the standard of which it estimates the degree of
their empirical use, but which is never itself an element in an
empirical synthesis. If, notwithstanding, such conceptions possess
objective validity, they may be called conceptus ratiocinati
(conceptions legitimately concluded); in cases where they do not, they
have been admitted on account of having the appearance of being
correctly concluded, and may be called conceptus ratiocinantes
(sophistical conceptions). But as this can only be sufficiently
demonstrated in that part of our treatise which relates to the
dialectical conclusions of reason, we shall omit any consideration of
it in this place. As we called the pure conceptions of the
understanding categories, we shall also distinguish those of pure
reason by a new name and call them transcendental ideas. These terms,
however, we must in the first place explain and justify.

Section I—Of Ideas in General

Despite the great wealth of words which European languages possess, the
thinker finds himself often at a loss for an expression exactly suited
to his conception, for want of which he is unable to make himself
intelligible either to others or to himself. To coin new words is a
pretension to legislation in language which is seldom successful; and,
before recourse is taken to so desperate an expedient, it is advisable
to examine the dead and learned languages, with the hope and the
probability that we may there meet with some adequate expression of the
notion we have in our minds. In this case, even if the original meaning
of the word has become somewhat uncertain, from carelessness or want of
caution on the part of the authors of it, it is always better to adhere
to and confirm its proper meaning—even although it may be doubtful
whether it was formerly used in exactly this sense—than to make our
labour vain by want of sufficient care to render ourselves
intelligible.

For this reason, when it happens that there exists only a single word
to express a certain conception, and this word, in its usual
acceptation, is thoroughly adequate to the conception, the accurate
distinction of which from related conceptions is of great importance,
we ought not to employ the expression improvidently, or, for the sake
of variety and elegance of style, use it as a synonym for other cognate
words. It is our duty, on the contrary, carefully to preserve its
peculiar signification, as otherwise it easily happens that when the
attention of the reader is no longer particularly attracted to the
expression, and it is lost amid the multitude of other words of very
different import, the thought which it conveyed, and which it alone
conveyed, is lost with it.

Plato employed the expression idea in a way that plainly showed he
meant by it something which is never derived from the senses, but which
far transcends even the conceptions of the understanding (with which
Aristotle occupied himself), inasmuch as in experience nothing
perfectly corresponding to them could be found. Ideas are, according to
him, archetypes of things themselves, and not merely keys to possible
experiences, like the categories. In his view they flow from the
highest reason, by which they have been imparted to human reason,
which, however, exists no longer in its original state, but is obliged
with great labour to recall by reminiscence—which is called
philosophy—the old but now sadly obscured ideas. I will not here enter
upon any literary investigation of the sense which this sublime
philosopher attached to this expression. I shall content myself with
remarking that it is nothing unusual, in common conversation as well as
in written works, by comparing the thoughts which an author has
delivered upon a subject, to understand him better than he understood
himself inasmuch as he may not have sufficiently determined his
conception, and thus have sometimes spoken, nay even thought, in
opposition to his own opinions.

Plato perceived very clearly that our faculty of cognition has the
feeling of a much higher vocation than that of merely spelling out
phenomena according to synthetical unity, for the purpose of being able
to read them as experience, and that our reason naturally raises itself
to cognitions far too elevated to admit of the possibility of an object
given by experience corresponding to them—cognitions which are
nevertheless real, and are not mere phantoms of the brain.

This philosopher found his ideas especially in all that is
practical,[41] that is, which rests upon freedom, which in its turn
ranks under cognitions that are the peculiar product of reason. He who
would derive from experience the conceptions of virtue, who would make
(as many have really done) that, which at best can but serve as an
imperfectly illustrative example, a model for or the formation of a
perfectly adequate idea on the subject, would in fact transform virtue
into a nonentity changeable according to time and circumstance and
utterly incapable of being employed as a rule. On the contrary, every
one is conscious that, when any one is held up to him as a model of
virtue, he compares this so-called model with the true original which
he possesses in his own mind and values him according to this standard.
But this standard is the idea of virtue, in relation to which all
possible objects of experience are indeed serviceable as
examples—proofs of the practicability in a certain degree of that which
the conception of virtue demands—but certainly not as archetypes. That
the actions of man will never be in perfect accordance with all the
requirements of the pure ideas of reason, does not prove the thought to
be chimerical. For only through this idea are all judgements as to
moral merit or demerit possible; it consequently lies at the foundation
of every approach to moral perfection, however far removed from it the
obstacles in human nature—indeterminable as to degree—may keep us.

 [41] He certainly extended the application of his conception to
 speculative cognitions also, provided they were given pure and
 completely à priori, nay, even to mathematics, although this science
 cannot possess an object otherwhere than in Possible experience. I
 cannot follow him in this, and as little can I follow him in his
 mystical deduction of these ideas, or in his hypostatization of them;
 although, in truth, the elevated and exaggerated language which he
 employed in describing them is quite capable of an interpretation more
 subdued and more in accordance with fact and the nature of things.

The Platonic Republic has become proverbial as an example—and a
striking one—of imaginary perfection, such as can exist only in the
brain of the idle thinker; and Brucker ridicules the philosopher for
maintaining that a prince can never govern well, unless he is
participant in the ideas. But we should do better to follow up this
thought and, where this admirable thinker leaves us without assistance,
employ new efforts to place it in clearer light, rather than carelessly
fling it aside as useless, under the very miserable and pernicious
pretext of impracticability. A constitution of the greatest possible
human freedom according to laws, by which the liberty of every
individual can consist with the liberty of every other (not of the
greatest possible happiness, for this follows necessarily from the
former), is, to say the least, a necessary idea, which must be placed
at the foundation not only of the first plan of the constitution of a
state, but of all its laws. And, in this, it not necessary at the
outset to take account of the obstacles which lie in our way—obstacles
which perhaps do not necessarily arise from the character of human
nature, but rather from the previous neglect of true ideas in
legislation. For there is nothing more pernicious and more unworthy of
a philosopher, than the vulgar appeal to a so-called adverse
experience, which indeed would not have existed, if those institutions
had been established at the proper time and in accordance with ideas;
while, instead of this, conceptions, crude for the very reason that
they have been drawn from experience, have marred and frustrated all
our better views and intentions. The more legislation and government
are in harmony with this idea, the more rare do punishments become and
thus it is quite reasonable to maintain, as Plato did, that in a
perfect state no punishments at all would be necessary. Now although a
perfect state may never exist, the idea is not on that account the less
just, which holds up this maximum as the archetype or standard of a
constitution, in order to bring legislative government always nearer
and nearer to the greatest possible perfection. For at what precise
degree human nature must stop in its progress, and how wide must be the
chasm which must necessarily exist between the idea and its
realization, are problems which no one can or ought to determine—and
for this reason, that it is the destination of freedom to overstep all
assigned limits between itself and the idea.

But not only in that wherein human reason is a real causal agent and
where ideas are operative causes (of actions and their objects), that
is to say, in the region of ethics, but also in regard to nature
herself, Plato saw clear proofs of an origin from ideas. A plant, and
animal, the regular order of nature—probably also the disposition of
the whole universe—give manifest evidence that they are possible only
by means of and according to ideas; that, indeed, no one creature,
under the individual conditions of its existence, perfectly harmonizes
with the idea of the most perfect of its kind—just as little as man
with the idea of humanity, which nevertheless he bears in his soul as
the archetypal standard of his actions; that, notwithstanding, these
ideas are in the highest sense individually, unchangeably, and
completely determined, and are the original causes of things; and that
the totality of connected objects in the universe is alone fully
adequate to that idea. Setting aside the exaggerations of expression in
the writings of this philosopher, the mental power exhibited in this
ascent from the ectypal mode of regarding the physical world to the
architectonic connection thereof according to ends, that is, ideas, is
an effort which deserves imitation and claims respect. But as regards
the principles of ethics, of legislation, and of religion, spheres in
which ideas alone render experience possible, although they never
attain to full expression therein, he has vindicated for himself a
position of peculiar merit, which is not appreciated only because it is
judged by the very empirical rules, the validity of which as principles
is destroyed by ideas. For as regards nature, experience presents us
with rules and is the source of truth, but in relation to ethical laws
experience is the parent of illusion, and it is in the highest degree
reprehensible to limit or to deduce the laws which dictate what I ought
to do, from what is done.

We must, however, omit the consideration of these important subjects,
the development of which is in reality the peculiar duty and dignity of
philosophy, and confine ourselves for the present to the more humble
but not less useful task of preparing a firm foundation for those
majestic edifices of moral science. For this foundation has been
hitherto insecure from the many subterranean passages which reason in
its confident but vain search for treasures has made in all directions.
Our present duty is to make ourselves perfectly acquainted with the
transcendental use made of pure reason, its principles and ideas, that
we may be able properly to determine and value its influence and real
worth. But before bringing these introductory remarks to a close, I beg
those who really have philosophy at heart—and their number is but
small—if they shall find themselves convinced by the considerations
following as well as by those above, to exert themselves to preserve to
the expression idea its original signification, and to take care that
it be not lost among those other expressions by which all sorts of
representations are loosely designated—that the interests of science
may not thereby suffer. We are in no want of words to denominate
adequately every mode of representation, without the necessity of
encroaching upon terms which are proper to others. The following is a
graduated list of them. The genus is representation in general
(representatio). Under it stands representation with consciousness
(perceptio). A perception which relates solely to the subject as a
modification of its state, is a sensation (sensatio), an objective
perception is a cognition (cognitio). A cognition is either an
intuition or a conception (intuitus vel conceptus). The former has an
immediate relation to the object and is singular and individual; the
latter has but a mediate relation, by means of a characteristic mark
which may be common to several things. A conception is either empirical
or pure. A pure conception, in so far as it has its origin in the
understanding alone, and is not the conception of a pure sensuous
image, is called notio. A conception formed from notions, which
transcends the possibility of experience, is an idea, or a conception
of reason. To one who has accustomed himself to these distinctions, it
must be quite intolerable to hear the representation of the colour red
called an idea. It ought not even to be called a notion or conception
of understanding.

Section II. Of Transcendental Ideas

Transcendental analytic showed us how the mere logical form of our
cognition can contain the origin of pure conceptions à priori,
conceptions which represent objects antecedently to all experience, or
rather, indicate the synthetical unity which alone renders possible an
empirical cognition of objects. The form of judgements—converted into a
conception of the synthesis of intuitions—produced the categories which
direct the employment of the understanding in experience. This
consideration warrants us to expect that the form of syllogisms, when
applied to synthetical unity of intuitions, following the rule of the
categories, will contain the origin of particular à priori conceptions,
which we may call pure conceptions of reason or transcendental ideas,
and which will determine the use of the understanding in the totality
of experience according to principles.

The function of reason in arguments consists in the universality of a
cognition according to conceptions, and the syllogism itself is a
judgement which is determined à priori in the whole extent of its
condition. The proposition: “Caius is mortal,” is one which may be
obtained from experience by the aid of the understanding alone; but my
wish is to find a conception which contains the condition under which
the predicate of this judgement is given—in this case, the conception
of man—and after subsuming under this condition, taken in its whole
extent (all men are mortal), I determine according to it the cognition
of the object thought, and say: “Caius is mortal.”

Hence, in the conclusion of a syllogism we restrict a predicate to a
certain object, after having thought it in the major in its whole
extent under a certain condition. This complete quantity of the extent
in relation to such a condition is called universality (universalitas).
To this corresponds totality (universitas) of conditions in the
synthesis of intuitions. The transcendental conception of reason is
therefore nothing else than the conception of the totality of the
conditions of a given conditioned. Now as the unconditioned alone
renders possible totality of conditions, and, conversely, the totality
of conditions is itself always unconditioned; a pure rational
conception in general can be defined and explained by means of the
conception of the unconditioned, in so far as it contains a basis for
the synthesis of the conditioned.

To the number of modes of relation which the understanding cogitates by
means of the categories, the number of pure rational conceptions will
correspond. We must therefore seek for, first, an unconditioned of the
categorical synthesis in a subject; secondly, of the hypothetical
synthesis of the members of a series; thirdly, of the disjunctive
synthesis of parts in a system.

There are exactly the same number of modes of syllogisms, each of which
proceeds through prosyllogisms to the unconditioned—one to the subject
which cannot be employed as predicate, another to the presupposition
which supposes nothing higher than itself, and the third to an
aggregate of the members of the complete division of a conception.
Hence the pure rational conceptions of totality in the synthesis of
conditions have a necessary foundation in the nature of human reason—at
least as modes of elevating the unity of the understanding to the
unconditioned. They may have no valid application, corresponding to
their transcendental employment, in concreto, and be thus of no greater
utility than to direct the understanding how, while extending them as
widely as possible, to maintain its exercise and application in perfect
consistence and harmony.

But, while speaking here of the totality of conditions and of the
unconditioned as the common title of all conceptions of reason, we
again light upon an expression which we find it impossible to dispense
with, and which nevertheless, owing to the ambiguity attaching to it
from long abuse, we cannot employ with safety. The word absolute is one
of the few words which, in its original signification, was perfectly
adequate to the conception it was intended to convey—a conception which
no other word in the same language exactly suits, and the loss—or,
which is the same thing, the incautious and loose employment—of which
must be followed by the loss of the conception itself. And, as it is a
conception which occupies much of the attention of reason, its loss
would be greatly to the detriment of all transcendental philosophy. The
word absolute is at present frequently used to denote that something
can be predicated of a thing considered in itself and intrinsically. In
this sense absolutely possible would signify that which is possible in
itself (interne)—which is, in fact, the least that one can predicate of
an object. On the other hand, it is sometimes employed to indicate that
a thing is valid in all respects—for example, absolute sovereignty.
Absolutely possible would in this sense signify that which is possible
in all relations and in every respect; and this is the most that can be
predicated of the possibility of a thing. Now these significations do
in truth frequently coincide. Thus, for example, that which is
intrinsically impossible, is also impossible in all relations, that is,
absolutely impossible. But in most cases they differ from each other
toto caelo, and I can by no means conclude that, because a thing is in
itself possible, it is also possible in all relations, and therefore
absolutely. Nay, more, I shall in the sequel show that absolute
necessity does not by any means depend on internal necessity, and that,
therefore, it must not be considered as synonymous with it. Of an
opposite which is intrinsically impossible, we may affirm that it is in
all respects impossible, and that, consequently, the thing itself, of
which this is the opposite, is absolutely necessary; but I cannot
reason conversely and say, the opposite of that which is absolutely
necessary is intrinsically impossible, that is, that the absolute
necessity of things is an internal necessity. For this internal
necessity is in certain cases a mere empty word with which the least
conception cannot be connected, while the conception of the necessity
of a thing in all relations possesses very peculiar determinations. Now
as the loss of a conception of great utility in speculative science
cannot be a matter of indifference to the philosopher, I trust that the
proper determination and careful preservation of the expression on
which the conception depends will likewise be not indifferent to him.

In this enlarged signification, then, shall I employ the word absolute,
in opposition to that which is valid only in some particular respect;
for the latter is restricted by conditions, the former is valid without
any restriction whatever.

Now the transcendental conception of reason has for its object nothing
else than absolute totality in the synthesis of conditions and does not
rest satisfied till it has attained to the absolutely, that is, in all
respects and relations, unconditioned. For pure reason leaves to the
understanding everything that immediately relates to the object of
intuition or rather to their synthesis in imagination. The former
restricts itself to the absolute totality in the employment of the
conceptions of the understanding and aims at carrying out the
synthetical unity which is cogitated in the category, even to the
unconditioned. This unity may hence be called the rational unity of
phenomena, as the other, which the category expresses, may be termed
the unity of the understanding. Reason, therefore, has an immediate
relation to the use of the understanding, not indeed in so far as the
latter contains the ground of possible experience (for the conception
of the absolute totality of conditions is not a conception that can be
employed in experience, because no experience is unconditioned), but
solely for the purpose of directing it to a certain unity, of which the
understanding has no conception, and the aim of which is to collect
into an absolute whole all acts of the understanding. Hence the
objective employment of the pure conceptions of reason is always
transcendent, while that of the pure conceptions of the understanding
must, according to their nature, be always immanent, inasmuch as they
are limited to possible experience.

I understand by idea a necessary conception of reason, to which no
corresponding object can be discovered in the world of sense.
Accordingly, the pure conceptions of reason at present under
consideration are transcendental ideas. They are conceptions of pure
reason, for they regard all empirical cognition as determined by means
of an absolute totality of conditions. They are not mere fictions, but
natural and necessary products of reason, and have hence a necessary
relation to the whole sphere of the exercise of the understanding. And,
finally, they are transcendent, and overstep the limits of all
experiences, in which, consequently, no object can ever be presented
that would be perfectly adequate to a transcendental idea. When we use
the word idea, we say, as regards its object (an object of the pure
understanding), a great deal, but as regards its subject (that is, in
respect of its reality under conditions of experience), exceedingly
little, because the idea, as the conception of a maximum, can never be
completely and adequately presented in concreto. Now, as in the merely
speculative employment of reason the latter is properly the sole aim,
and as in this case the approximation to a conception, which is never
attained in practice, is the same thing as if the conception were
non-existent—it is commonly said of the conception of this kind, “it is
only an idea.” So we might very well say, “the absolute totality of all
phenomena is only an idea,” for, as we never can present an adequate
representation of it, it remains for us a problem incapable of
solution. On the other hand, as in the practical use of the
understanding we have only to do with action and practice according to
rules, an idea of pure reason can always be given really in concreto,
although only partially, nay, it is the indispensable condition of all
practical employment of reason. The practice or execution of the idea
is always limited and defective, but nevertheless within indeterminable
boundaries, consequently always under the influence of the conception
of an absolute perfection. And thus the practical idea is always in the
highest degree fruitful, and in relation to real actions indispensably
necessary. In the idea, pure reason possesses even causality and the
power of producing that which its conception contains. Hence we cannot
say of wisdom, in a disparaging way, “it is only an idea.” For, for the
very reason that it is the idea of the necessary unity of all possible
aims, it must be for all practical exertions and endeavours the
primitive condition and rule—a rule which, if not constitutive, is at
least limitative.

Now, although we must say of the transcendental conceptions of reason,
“they are only ideas,” we must not, on this account, look upon them as
superfluous and nugatory. For, although no object can be determined by
them, they can be of great utility, unobserved and at the basis of the
edifice of the understanding, as the canon for its extended and
self-consistent exercise—a canon which, indeed, does not enable it to
cognize more in an object than it would cognize by the help of its own
conceptions, but which guides it more securely in its cognition. Not to
mention that they perhaps render possible a transition from our
conceptions of nature and the non-ego to the practical conceptions, and
thus produce for even ethical ideas keeping, so to speak, and
connection with the speculative cognitions of reason. The explication
of all this must be looked for in the sequel.

But setting aside, in conformity with our original purpose, the
consideration of the practical ideas, we proceed to contemplate reason
in its speculative use alone, nay, in a still more restricted sphere,
to wit, in the transcendental use; and here must strike into the same
path which we followed in our deduction of the categories. That is to
say, we shall consider the logical form of the cognition of reason,
that we may see whether reason may not be thereby a source of
conceptions which enables us to regard objects in themselves as
determined synthetically à priori, in relation to one or other of the
functions of reason.

Reason, considered as the faculty of a certain logical form of
cognition, is the faculty of conclusion, that is, of mediate
judgement—by means of the subsumption of the condition of a possible
judgement under the condition of a given judgement. The given judgement
is the general rule (major). The subsumption of the condition of
another possible judgement under the condition of the rule is the
minor. The actual judgement, which enounces the assertion of the rule
in the subsumed case, is the conclusion (conclusio). The rule
predicates something generally under a certain condition. The condition
of the rule is satisfied in some particular case. It follows that what
was valid in general under that condition must also be considered as
valid in the particular case which satisfies this condition. It is very
plain that reason attains to a cognition, by means of acts of the
understanding which constitute a series of conditions. When I arrive at
the proposition, “All bodies are changeable,” by beginning with the
more remote cognition (in which the conception of body does not appear,
but which nevertheless contains the condition of that conception), “All
compound is changeable,” by proceeding from this to a less remote
cognition, which stands under the condition of the former, “Bodies are
compound,” and hence to a third, which at length connects for me the
remote cognition (changeable) with the one before me, “Consequently,
bodies are changeable”—I have arrived at a cognition (conclusion)
through a series of conditions (premisses). Now every series, whose
exponent (of the categorical or hypothetical judgement) is given, can
be continued; consequently the same procedure of reason conducts us to
the ratiocinatio polysyllogistica, which is a series of syllogisms,
that can be continued either on the side of the conditions (per
prosyllogismos) or of the conditioned (per episyllogismos) to an
indefinite extent.

But we very soon perceive that the chain or series of prosyllogisms,
that is, of deduced cognitions on the side of the grounds or conditions
of a given cognition, in other words, the ascending series of
syllogisms must have a very different relation to the faculty of reason
from that of the descending series, that is, the progressive procedure
of reason on the side of the conditioned by means of episyllogisms.
For, as in the former case the cognition (conclusio) is given only as
conditioned, reason can attain to this cognition only under the
presupposition that all the members of the series on the side of the
conditions are given (totality in the series of premisses), because
only under this supposition is the judgement we may be considering
possible à priori; while on the side of the conditioned or the
inferences, only an incomplete and becoming, and not a presupposed or
given series, consequently only a potential progression, is cogitated.
Hence, when a cognition is contemplated as conditioned, reason is
compelled to consider the series of conditions in an ascending line as
completed and given in their totality. But if the very same condition
is considered at the same time as the condition of other cognitions,
which together constitute a series of inferences or consequences in a
descending line, reason may preserve a perfect indifference, as to how
far this progression may extend _a parte posteriori_, and whether the
totality of this series is possible, because it stands in no need of
such a series for the purpose of arriving at the conclusion before it,
inasmuch as this conclusion is sufficiently guaranteed and determined
on grounds a parte priori. It may be the case, that upon the side of
the conditions the series of premisses has a first or highest
condition, or it may not possess this, and so be a parte priori
unlimited; but it must, nevertheless, contain totality of conditions,
even admitting that we never could succeed in completely apprehending
it; and the whole series must be unconditionally true, if the
conditioned, which is considered as an inference resulting from it, is
to be held as true. This is a requirement of reason, which announces
its cognition as determined à priori and as necessary, either in
itself—and in this case it needs no grounds to rest upon—or, if it is
deduced, as a member of a series of grounds, which is itself
unconditionally true.

Section III. System of Transcendental Ideas

We are not at present engaged with a logical dialectic, which makes
complete abstraction of the content of cognition and aims only at
unveiling the illusory appearance in the form of syllogisms. Our
subject is transcendental dialectic, which must contain, completely à
priori, the origin of certain cognitions drawn from pure reason, and
the origin of certain deduced conceptions, the object of which cannot
be given empirically and which therefore lie beyond the sphere of the
faculty of understanding. We have observed, from the natural relation
which the transcendental use of our cognition, in syllogisms as well as
in judgements, must have to the logical, that there are three kinds of
dialectical arguments, corresponding to the three modes of conclusion,
by which reason attains to cognitions on principles; and that in all it
is the business of reason to ascend from the conditioned synthesis,
beyond which the understanding never proceeds, to the unconditioned
which the understanding never can reach.

Now the most general relations which can exist in our representations
are: 1st, the relation to the subject; 2nd, the relation to objects,
either as phenomena, or as objects of thought in general. If we connect
this subdivision with the main division, all the relations of our
representations, of which we can form either a conception or an idea,
are threefold: 1. The relation to the subject; 2. The relation to the
manifold of the object as a phenomenon; 3. The relation to all things
in general.

Now all pure conceptions have to do in general with the synthetical
unity of representations; conceptions of pure reason (transcendental
ideas), on the other hand, with the unconditional synthetical unity of
all conditions. It follows that all transcendental ideas arrange
themselves in three classes, the first of which contains the absolute
(unconditioned) unity of the thinking subject, the second the absolute
unity of the series of the conditions of a phenomenon, the third the
absolute unity of the condition of all objects of thought in general.

The thinking subject is the object-matter of Psychology; the sum total
of all phenomena (the world) is the object-matter of Cosmology; and the
thing which contains the highest condition of the possibility of all
that is cogitable (the being of all beings) is the object-matter of all
Theology. Thus pure reason presents us with the idea of a
transcendental doctrine of the soul (psychologia rationalis), of a
transcendental science of the world (cosmologia rationalis), and
finally of a transcendental doctrine of God (theologia
transcendentalis). Understanding cannot originate even the outline of
any of these sciences, even when connected with the highest logical use
of reason, that is, all cogitable syllogisms—for the purpose of
proceeding from one object (phenomenon) to all others, even to the
utmost limits of the empirical synthesis. They are, on the contrary,
pure and genuine products, or problems, of pure reason.

What modi of the pure conceptions of reason these transcendental ideas
are will be fully exposed in the following chapter. They follow the
guiding thread of the categories. For pure reason never relates
immediately to objects, but to the conceptions of these contained in
the understanding. In like manner, it will be made manifest in the
detailed explanation of these ideas—how reason, merely through the
synthetical use of the same function which it employs in a categorical
syllogism, necessarily attains to the conception of the absolute unity
of the thinking subject—how the logical procedure in hypothetical ideas
necessarily produces the idea of the absolutely unconditioned in a
series of given conditions, and finally—how the mere form of the
disjunctive syllogism involves the highest conception of a being of all
beings: a thought which at first sight seems in the highest degree
paradoxical.

An objective deduction, such as we were able to present in the case of
the categories, is impossible as regards these transcendental ideas.
For they have, in truth, no relation to any object, in experience, for
the very reason that they are only ideas. But a subjective deduction of
them from the nature of our reason is possible, and has been given in
the present chapter.

It is easy to perceive that the sole aim of pure reason is the absolute
totality of the synthesis on the side of the conditions, and that it
does not concern itself with the absolute completeness on the Part of
the conditioned. For of the former alone does she stand in need, in
order to preposit the whole series of conditions, and thus present them
to the understanding à priori. But if we once have a completely (and
unconditionally) given condition, there is no further necessity, in
proceeding with the series, for a conception of reason; for the
understanding takes of itself every step downward, from the condition
to the conditioned. Thus the transcendental ideas are available only
for ascending in the series of conditions, till we reach the
unconditioned, that is, principles. As regards descending to the
conditioned, on the other hand, we find that there is a widely
extensive logical use which reason makes of the laws of the
understanding, but that a transcendental use thereof is impossible; and
that when we form an idea of the absolute totality of such a synthesis,
for example, of the whole series of all future changes in the world,
this idea is a mere ens rationis, an arbitrary fiction of thought, and
not a necessary presupposition of reason. For the possibility of the
conditioned presupposes the totality of its conditions, but not of its
consequences. Consequently, this conception is not a transcendental
idea—and it is with these alone that we are at present occupied.

Finally, it is obvious that there exists among the transcendental ideas
a certain connection and unity, and that pure reason, by means of them,
collects all its cognitions into one system. From the cognition of self
to the cognition of the world, and through these to the supreme being,
the progression is so natural, that it seems to resemble the logical
march of reason from the premisses to the conclusion.[42] Now whether
there lies unobserved at the foundation of these ideas an analogy of
the same kind as exists between the logical and transcendental
procedure of reason, is another of those questions, the answer to which
we must not expect till we arrive at a more advanced stage in our
inquiries. In this cursory and preliminary view, we have, meanwhile,
reached our aim. For we have dispelled the ambiguity which attached to
the transcendental conceptions of reason, from their being commonly
mixed up with other conceptions in the systems of philosophers, and not
properly distinguished from the conceptions of the understanding; we
have exposed their origin and, thereby, at the same time their
determinate number, and presented them in a systematic connection, and
have thus marked out and enclosed a definite sphere for pure reason.

 [42] The science of Metaphysics has for the proper object of its
 inquiries only three grand ideas: GOD, FREEDOM, and IMMORTALITY, and
 it aims at showing, that the second conception, conjoined with the
 first, must lead to the third, as a necessary conclusion. All the
 other subjects with which it occupies itself, are merely means for the
 attainment and realization of these ideas. It does not require these
 ideas for the construction of a science of nature, but, on the
 contrary, for the purpose of passing beyond the sphere of nature. A
 complete insight into and comprehension of them would render Theology,
 Ethics, and, through the conjunction of both, Religion, solely
 dependent on the speculative faculty of reason. In a systematic
 representation of these ideas the above-mentioned arrangement—the
 synthetical one—would be the most suitable; but in the investigation
 which must necessarily precede it, the analytical, which reverses this
 arrangement, would be better adapted to our purpose, as in it we
 should proceed from that which experience immediately presents to
 us—psychology, to cosmology, and thence to theology.

TRANSCENDENTAL DIALECTIC—BOOK II—OF THE DIALECTICAL PROCEDURE OF PURE
REASON

It may be said that the object of a merely transcendental idea is
something of which we have no conception, although the idea may be a
necessary product of reason according to its original laws. For, in
fact, a conception of an object that is adequate to the idea given by
reason, is impossible. For such an object must be capable of being
presented and intuited in a Possible experience. But we should express
our meaning better, and with less risk of being misunderstood, if we
said that we can have no knowledge of an object, which perfectly
corresponds to an idea, although we may possess a problematical
conception thereof.

Now the transcendental (subjective) reality at least of the pure
conceptions of reason rests upon the fact that we are led to such ideas
by a necessary procedure of reason. There must therefore be syllogisms
which contain no empirical premisses, and by means of which we conclude
from something that we do know, to something of which we do not even
possess a conception, to which we, nevertheless, by an unavoidable
illusion, ascribe objective reality. Such arguments are, as regards
their result, rather to be termed sophisms than syllogisms, although
indeed, as regards their origin, they are very well entitled to the
latter name, inasmuch as they are not fictions or accidental products
of reason, but are necessitated by its very nature. They are sophisms,
not of men, but of pure reason herself, from which the Wisest cannot
free himself. After long labour he may be able to guard against the
error, but he can never be thoroughly rid of the illusion which
continually mocks and misleads him.

Of these dialectical arguments there are three kinds, corresponding
to the number of the ideas which their conclusions present. In the
argument or syllogism of the first class, I conclude, from the
transcendental conception of the subject which contains no manifold,
the absolute unity of the subject itself, of which I cannot in this
manner attain to a conception. This dialectical argument I shall
call the transcendental paralogism. The second class of sophistical
arguments is occupied with the transcendental conception of the
absolute totality of the series of conditions for a given phenomenon,
and I conclude, from the fact that I have always a self-contradictory
conception of the unconditioned synthetical unity of the series upon
one side, the truth of the opposite unity, of which I have nevertheless
no conception. The condition of reason in these dialectical arguments,
I shall term the antinomy of pure reason. Finally, according to the
third kind of sophistical argument, I conclude, from the totality of
the conditions of thinking objects in general, in so far as they can
be given, the absolute synthetical unity of all conditions of the
possibility of things in general; that is, from things which I do not
know in their mere transcendental conception, I conclude a being of all
beings which I know still less by means of a transcendental conception,
and of whose unconditioned necessity I can form no conception whatever.
This dialectical argument I shall call the ideal of pure reason.

Chapter I. Of the Paralogisms of Pure Reason

The logical paralogism consists in the falsity of an argument in
respect of its form, be the content what it may. But a transcendental
paralogism has a transcendental foundation, and concludes falsely,
while the form is correct and unexceptionable. In this manner the
paralogism has its foundation in the nature of human reason, and is the
parent of an unavoidable, though not insoluble, mental illusion.

We now come to a conception which was not inserted in the general list
of transcendental conceptions, and yet must be reckoned with them, but
at the same time without in the least altering, or indicating a
deficiency in that table. This is the conception, or, if the term is
preferred, the judgement, “I think.” But it is readily perceived that
this thought is as it were the vehicle of all conceptions in general,
and consequently of transcendental conceptions also, and that it is
therefore regarded as a transcendental conception, although it can have
no peculiar claim to be so ranked, inasmuch as its only use is to
indicate that all thought is accompanied by consciousness. At the same
time, pure as this conception is from empirical content (impressions of
the senses), it enables us to distinguish two different kinds of
objects. “I,” as thinking, am an object of the internal sense, and am
called soul. That which is an object of the external senses is called
body. Thus the expression, “I,” as a thinking being, designates the
object-matter of psychology, which may be called “the rational doctrine
of the soul,” inasmuch as in this science I desire to know nothing of
the soul but what, independently of all experience (which determines me
in concreto), may be concluded from this conception “I,” in so far as
it appears in all thought.

Now, the rational doctrine of the soul is really an undertaking of this
kind. For if the smallest empirical element of thought, if any
particular perception of my internal state, were to be introduced among
the grounds of cognition of this science, it would not be a rational,
but an empirical doctrine of the soul. We have thus before us a
pretended science, raised upon the single proposition, “I think,” whose
foundation or want of foundation we may very properly, and agreeably
with the nature of a transcendental philosophy, here examine. It ought
not to be objected that in this proposition, which expresses the
perception of one’s self, an internal experience is asserted, and that
consequently the rational doctrine of the soul which is founded upon
it, is not pure, but partly founded upon an empirical principle. For
this internal perception is nothing more than the mere apperception, “I
think,” which in fact renders all transcendental conceptions possible,
in which we say, “I think substance, cause, etc.” For internal
experience in general and its possibility, or perception in general,
and its relation to other perceptions, unless some particular
distinction or determination thereof is empirically given, cannot be
regarded as empirical cognition, but as cognition of the empirical, and
belongs to the investigation of the possibility of every experience,
which is certainly transcendental. The smallest object of experience
(for example, only pleasure or pain), that should be included in the
general representation of self-consciousness, would immediately change
the rational into an empirical psychology.

“I think” is therefore the only text of rational psychology, from which
it must develop its whole system. It is manifest that this thought,
when applied to an object (myself), can contain nothing but
transcendental predicates thereof; because the least empirical
predicate would destroy the purity of the science and its independence
of all experience.

But we shall have to follow here the guidance of the categories—only,
as in the present case a thing, “I,” as thinking being, is at first
given, we shall—not indeed change the order of the categories as it
stands in the table—but begin at the category of substance, by which at
the a thing in itself is represented and proceeds backwards through the
series. The topic of the rational doctrine of the soul, from which
everything else it may contain must be deduced, is accordingly as
follows:

            1                          2
  The Soul is SUBSTANCE       As regards its quality
                                it is SIMPLE

                      3
          As regards the different
          times in which it exists,
          it is numerically identical,
          that is UNITY, not Plurality.

                       4
  It is in relation to possible objects in space[43]

 [43] The reader, who may not so easily perceive the psychological
 sense of these expressions, taken here in their transcendental
 abstraction, and cannot guess why the latter attribute of the soul
 belongs to the category of existence, will find the expressions
 sufficiently explained and justified in the sequel. I have, moreover,
 to apologize for the Latin terms which have been employed, instead of
 their German synonyms, contrary to the rules of correct writing. But I
 judged it better to sacrifice elegance to perspicuity.

From these elements originate all the conceptions of pure psychology,
by combination alone, without the aid of any other principle. This
substance, merely as an object of the internal sense, gives the
conception of Immateriality; as simple substance, that of
Incorruptibility; its identity, as intellectual substance, gives the
conception of Personality; all these three together, Spirituality. Its
relation to objects in space gives us the conception of connection
(commercium) with bodies. Thus it represents thinking substance as the
principle of life in matter, that is, as a soul (anima), and as the
ground of Animality; and this, limited and determined by the conception
of spirituality, gives us that of Immortality.

Now to these conceptions relate four paralogisms of a transcendental
psychology, which is falsely held to be a science of pure reason,
touching the nature of our thinking being. We can, however, lay at the
foundation of this science nothing but the simple and in itself
perfectly contentless representation “i” which cannot even be called a
conception, but merely a consciousness which accompanies all
conceptions. By this “I,” or “He,” or “It,” who or which thinks,
nothing more is represented than a transcendental subject of thought =
x, which is cognized only by means of the thoughts that are its
predicates, and of which, apart from these, we cannot form the least
conception. Hence in a perpetual circle, inasmuch as we must always
employ it, in order to frame any judgement respecting it. And this
inconvenience we find it impossible to rid ourselves of, because
consciousness in itself is not so much a representation distinguishing
a particular object, as a form of representation in general, in so far
as it may be termed cognition; for in and by cognition alone do I think
anything.

It must, however, appear extraordinary at first sight that the
condition under which I think, and which is consequently a property of
my subject, should be held to be likewise valid for every existence
which thinks, and that we can presume to base upon a seemingly
empirical proposition a judgement which is apodeictic and universal, to
wit, that everything which thinks is constituted as the voice of my
consciousness declares it to be, that is, as a self-conscious being.
The cause of this belief is to be found in the fact that we necessarily
attribute to things à priori all the properties which constitute
conditions under which alone we can cogitate them. Now I cannot obtain
the least representation of a thinking being by means of external
experience, but solely through self-consciousness. Such objects are
consequently nothing more than the transference of this consciousness
of mine to other things which can only thus be represented as thinking
beings. The proposition, “I think,” is, in the present case, understood
in a problematical sense, not in so far as it contains a perception of
an existence (like the Cartesian “Cogito, ergo sum”), but in regard to
its mere possibility—for the purpose of discovering what properties may
be inferred from so simple a proposition and predicated of the subject
of it.

If at the foundation of our pure rational cognition of thinking beings
there lay more than the mere Cogito—if we could likewise call in aid
observations on the play of our thoughts, and the thence derived
natural laws of the thinking self, there would arise an empirical
psychology which would be a kind of physiology of the internal sense
and might possibly be capable of explaining the phenomena of that
sense. But it could never be available for discovering those properties
which do not belong to possible experience (such as the quality of
simplicity), nor could it make any apodeictic enunciation on the nature
of thinking beings: it would therefore not be a rational psychology.

Now, as the proposition “I think” (in the problematical sense) contains
the form of every judgement in general and is the constant
accompaniment of all the categories, it is manifest that conclusions
are drawn from it only by a transcendental employment of the
understanding. This use of the understanding excludes all empirical
elements; and we cannot, as has been shown above, have any favourable
conception beforehand of its procedure. We shall therefore follow with
a critical eye this proposition through all the predicaments of pure
psychology; but we shall, for brevity’s sake, allow this examination to
proceed in an uninterrupted connection.

Before entering on this task, however, the following general remark may
help to quicken our attention to this mode of argument. It is not
merely through my thinking that I cognize an object, but only through
my determining a given intuition in relation to the unity of
consciousness in which all thinking consists. It follows that I cognize
myself, not through my being conscious of myself as thinking, but only
when I am conscious of the intuition of myself as determined in
relation to the function of thought. All the modi of self-consciousness
in thought are hence not conceptions of objects (conceptions of the
understanding—categories); they are mere logical functions, which do
not present to thought an object to be cognized, and cannot therefore
present my Self as an object. Not the consciousness of the determining,
but only that of the determinable self, that is, of my internal
intuition (in so far as the manifold contained in it can be connected
conformably with the general condition of the unity of apperception in
thought), is the object.

1. In all judgements I am the determining subject of that relation
which constitutes a judgement. But that the I which thinks, must be
considered as in thought always a subject, and as a thing which cannot
be a predicate to thought, is an apodeictic and identical proposition.
But this proposition does not signify that I, as an object, am, for
myself, a self-subsistent being or substance. This latter statement—an
ambitious one—requires to be supported by data which are not to be
discovered in thought; and are perhaps (in so far as I consider the
thinking self merely as such) not to be discovered in the thinking self
at all.

2. That the I or Ego of apperception, and consequently in all thought,
is singular or simple, and cannot be resolved into a plurality of
subjects, and therefore indicates a logically simple subject—this is
self-evident from the very conception of an Ego, and is consequently an
analytical proposition. But this is not tantamount to declaring that
the thinking Ego is a simple substance—for this would be a synthetical
proposition. The conception of substance always relates to intuitions,
which with me cannot be other than sensuous, and which consequently lie
completely out of the sphere of the understanding and its thought: but
to this sphere belongs the affirmation that the Ego is simple in
thought. It would indeed be surprising, if the conception of
“substance,” which in other cases requires so much labour to
distinguish from the other elements presented by intuition—so much
trouble, too, to discover whether it can be simple (as in the case of
the parts of matter)—should be presented immediately to me, as if by
revelation, in the poorest mental representation of all.

3. The proposition of the identity of my Self amidst all the manifold
representations of which I am conscious, is likewise a proposition
lying in the conceptions themselves, and is consequently analytical.
But this identity of the subject, of which I am conscious in all its
representations, does not relate to or concern the intuition of the
subject, by which it is given as an object. This proposition cannot
therefore enounce the identity of the person, by which is understood
the consciousness of the identity of its own substance as a thinking
being in all change and variation of circumstances. To prove this, we
should require not a mere analysis of the proposition, but synthetical
judgements based upon a given intuition.

4. I distinguish my own existence, as that of a thinking being, from
that of other things external to me—among which my body also is
reckoned. This is also an analytical proposition, for other things are
exactly those which I think as different or distinguished from myself.
But whether this consciousness of myself is possible without things
external to me; and whether therefore I can exist merely as a thinking
being (without being man)—cannot be known or inferred from this
proposition.

Thus we have gained nothing as regards the cognition of myself as
object, by the analysis of the consciousness of my Self in thought. The
logical exposition of thought in general is mistaken for a metaphysical
determination of the object.

Our Critique would be an investigation utterly superfluous, if there
existed a possibility of proving à priori, that all thinking beings are
in themselves simple substances, as such, therefore, possess the
inseparable attribute of personality, and are conscious of their
existence apart from and unconnected with matter. For we should thus
have taken a step beyond the world of sense, and have penetrated into
the sphere of noumena; and in this case the right could not be denied
us of extending our knowledge in this sphere, of establishing
ourselves, and, under a favouring star, appropriating to ourselves
possessions in it. For the proposition: “Every thinking being, as such,
is simple substance,” is an à priori synthetical proposition; because
in the first place it goes beyond the conception which is the subject
of it, and adds to the mere notion of a thinking being the mode of its
existence, and in the second place annexes a predicate (that of
simplicity) to the latter conception—a predicate which it could not
have discovered in the sphere of experience. It would follow that à
priori synthetical propositions are possible and legitimate, not only,
as we have maintained, in relation to objects of possible experience,
and as principles of the possibility of this experience itself, but are
applicable to things in themselves—an inference which makes an end of
the whole of this Critique, and obliges us to fall back on the old mode
of metaphysical procedure. But indeed the danger is not so great, if we
look a little closer into the question.

There lurks in the procedure of rational Psychology a paralogism, which
is represented in the following syllogism:

That which cannot be cogitated otherwise than as subject, does not
exist otherwise than as subject, and is therefore substance.

A thinking being, considered merely as such, cannot be cogitated
otherwise than as subject.

Therefore it exists also as such, that is, as substance.

In the major we speak of a being that can be cogitated generally and in
every relation, consequently as it may be given in intuition. But in
the minor we speak of the same being only in so far as it regards
itself as subject, relatively to thought and the unity of
consciousness, but not in relation to intuition, by which it is
presented as an object to thought. Thus the conclusion is here arrived
at by a Sophisma figurae dictionis.[44]

 [44] Thought is taken in the two premisses in two totally different
 senses. In the major it is considered as relating and applying to
 objects in general, consequently to objects of intuition also. In the
 minor, we understand it as relating merely to self-consciousness. In
 this sense, we do not cogitate an object, but merely the relation to
 the self-consciousness of the subject, as the form of thought. In the
 former premiss we speak of things which cannot be cogitated otherwise
 than as subjects. In the second, we do not speak of things, but of
 thought (all objects being abstracted), in which the Ego is always the
 subject of consciousness. Hence the conclusion cannot be, “I cannot
 exist otherwise than as subject”; but only “I can, in cogitating my
 existence, employ my Ego only as the subject of the judgement.” But
 this is an identical proposition, and throws no light on the mode of
 my existence.

That this famous argument is a mere paralogism, will be plain to any
one who will consider the general remark which precedes our exposition
of the principles of the pure understanding, and the section on
noumena. For it was there proved that the conception of a thing, which
can exist per se—only as a subject and never as a predicate, possesses
no objective reality; that is to say, we can never know whether there
exists any object to correspond to the conception; consequently, the
conception is nothing more than a conception, and from it we derive no
proper knowledge. If this conception is to indicate by the term
substance, an object that can be given, if it is to become a cognition,
we must have at the foundation of the cognition a permanent intuition,
as the indispensable condition of its objective reality. For through
intuition alone can an object be given. But in internal intuition there
is nothing permanent, for the Ego is but the consciousness of my
thought. If then, we appeal merely to thought, we cannot discover the
necessary condition of the application of the conception of
substance—that is, of a subject existing per se—to the subject as a
thinking being. And thus the conception of the simple nature of
substance, which is connected with the objective reality of this
conception, is shown to be also invalid, and to be, in fact, nothing
more than the logical qualitative unity of self-consciousness in
thought; whilst we remain perfectly ignorant whether the subject is
composite or not.

Refutation of the Argument of Mendelssohn for the Substantiality or
Permanence of the Soul.

This acute philosopher easily perceived the insufficiency of the common
argument which attempts to prove that the soul—it being granted that it
is a simple being—cannot perish by dissolution or decomposition; he saw
it is not impossible for it to cease to be by extinction, or
disappearance. He endeavoured to prove in his Phaedo, that the soul
cannot be annihilated, by showing that a simple being cannot cease to
exist. Inasmuch as, he said, a simple existence cannot diminish, nor
gradually lose portions of its being, and thus be by degrees reduced to
nothing (for it possesses no parts, and therefore no multiplicity),
between the moment in which it is, and the moment in which it is not,
no time can be discovered—which is impossible. But this philosopher did
not consider that, granting the soul to possess this simple nature,
which contains no parts external to each other and consequently no
extensive quantity, we cannot refuse to it any less than to any other
being, intensive quantity, that is, a degree of reality in regard to
all its faculties, nay, to all that constitutes its existence. But this
degree of reality can become less and less through an infinite series
of smaller degrees. It follows, therefore, that this supposed
substance—this thing, the permanence of which is not assured in any
other way, may, if not by decomposition, by gradual loss (remissio) of
its powers (consequently by elanguescence, if I may employ this
expression), be changed into nothing. For consciousness itself has
always a degree, which may be lessened.[45] Consequently the faculty of
being conscious may be diminished; and so with all other faculties. The
permanence of the soul, therefore, as an object of the internal sense,
remains undemonstrated, nay, even indemonstrable. Its permanence in
life is evident, per se, inasmuch as the thinking being (as man) is to
itself, at the same time, an object of the external senses. But this
does not authorize the rational psychologist to affirm, from mere
conceptions, its permanence beyond life.[46]

 [45] Clearness is not, as logicians maintain, the consciousness of a
 representation. For a certain degree of consciousness, which may not,
 however, be sufficient for recollection, is to be met with in many dim
 representations. For without any consciousness at all, we should not
 be able to recognize any difference in the obscure representations we
 connect; as we really can do with many conceptions, such as those of
 right and justice, and those of the musician, who strikes at once
 several notes in improvising a piece of music. But a representation is
 clear, in which our consciousness is sufficient for the consciousness
 of the difference of this representation from others. If we are only
 conscious that there is a difference, but are not conscious of the
 difference—that is, what the difference is—the representation must be
 termed obscure. There is, consequently, an infinite series of degrees
 of consciousness down to its entire disappearance.

 [46] There are some who think they have done enough to establish a new
 possibility in the mode of the existence of souls, when they have
 shown that there is no contradiction in their hypotheses on this
 subject. Such are those who affirm the possibility of thought—of which
 they have no other knowledge than what they derive from its use in
 connecting empirical intuitions presented in this our human life—after
 this life has ceased. But it is very easy to embarrass them by the
 introduction of counter-possibilities, which rest upon quite as good a
 foundation. Such, for example, is the possibility of the division of a
 simple substance into several substances; and conversely, of the
 coalition of several into one simple substance. For, although
 divisibility presupposes composition, it does not necessarily require
 a composition of substances, but only of the degrees (of the several
 faculties) of one and the same substance. Now we can cogitate all the
 powers and faculties of the soul—even that of consciousness—as
 diminished by one half, the substance still remaining. In the same way
 we can represent to ourselves without contradiction, this obliterated
 half as preserved, not in the soul, but without it; and we can believe
 that, as in this case every thing that is real in the soul, and has a
 degree—consequently its entire existence—has been halved, a particular
 substance would arise out of the soul. For the multiplicity, which has
 been divided, formerly existed, but not as a multiplicity of
 substances, but of every reality as the quantum of existence in it;
 and the unity of substance was merely a mode of existence, which by
 this division alone has been transformed into a plurality of
 subsistence. In the same manner several simple substances might
 coalesce into one, without anything being lost except the plurality of
 subsistence, inasmuch as the one substance would contain the degree of
 reality of all the former substances. Perhaps, indeed, the simple
 substances, which appear under the form of matter, might (not indeed
 by a mechanical or chemical influence upon each other, but by an
 unknown influence, of which the former would be but the phenomenal
 appearance), by means of such a dynamical division of the
 parent-souls, as intensive quantities, produce other souls, while the
 former repaired the loss thus sustained with new matter of the same
 sort. I am far from allowing any value to such chimeras; and the
 principles of our analytic have clearly proved that no other than an
 empirical use of the categories—that of substance, for example—is
 possible. But if the rationalist is bold enough to construct, on the
 mere authority of the faculty of thought—without any intuition,
 whereby an object is given—a self-subsistent being, merely because the
 unity of apperception in thought cannot allow him to believe it a
 composite being, instead of declaring, as he ought to do, that he is
 unable to explain the possibility of a thinking nature; what ought to
 hinder the materialist, with as complete an independence of
 experience, to employ the principle of the rationalist in a directly
 opposite manner—still preserving the formal unity required by his
 opponent?

If, now, we take the above propositions—as they must be accepted as
valid for all thinking beings in the system of rational psychology—in
synthetical connection, and proceed, from the category of relation,
with the proposition: “All thinking beings are, as such, substances,”
backwards through the series, till the circle is completed; we come at
last to their existence, of which, in this system of rational
psychology, substances are held to be conscious, independently of
external things; nay, it is asserted that, in relation to the
permanence which is a necessary characteristic of substance, they can
of themselves determine external things. It follows that idealism—at
least problematical idealism, is perfectly unavoidable in this
rationalistic system. And, if the existence of outward things is not
held to be requisite to the determination of the existence of a
substance in time, the existence of these outward things at all, is a
gratuitous assumption which remains without the possibility of a proof.

But if we proceed analytically—the “I think” as a proposition
containing in itself an existence as given, consequently modality being
the principle—and dissect this proposition, in order to ascertain its
content, and discover whether and how this Ego determines its existence
in time and space without the aid of anything external; the
propositions of rationalistic psychology would not begin with the
conception of a thinking being, but with a reality, and the properties
of a thinking being in general would be deduced from the mode in which
this reality is cogitated, after everything empirical had been
abstracted; as is shown in the following table:

                        1
                      I think,

            2                             3
        as Subject,              as simple Subject,

                        4
               as identical Subject,
           in every state of my thought.

Now, inasmuch as it is not determined in this second proposition,
whether I can exist and be cogitated only as subject, and not also as a
predicate of another being, the conception of a subject is here taken
in a merely logical sense; and it remains undetermined, whether
substance is to be cogitated under the conception or not. But in the
third proposition, the absolute unity of apperception—the simple Ego in
the representation to which all connection and separation, which
constitute thought, relate, is of itself important; even although it
presents us with no information about the constitution or subsistence
of the subject. Apperception is something real, and the simplicity of
its nature is given in the very fact of its possibility. Now in space
there is nothing real that is at the same time simple; for points,
which are the only simple things in space, are merely limits, but not
constituent parts of space. From this follows the impossibility of a
definition on the basis of materialism of the constitution of my Ego as
a merely thinking subject. But, because my existence is considered in
the first proposition as given, for it does not mean, “Every thinking
being exists” (for this would be predicating of them absolute
necessity), but only, “I exist thinking”; the proposition is quite
empirical, and contains the determinability of my existence merely in
relation to my representations in time. But as I require for this
purpose something that is permanent, such as is not given in internal
intuition; the mode of my existence, whether as substance or as
accident, cannot be determined by means of this simple
self-consciousness. Thus, if materialism is inadequate to explain the
mode in which I exist, spiritualism is likewise as insufficient; and
the conclusion is that we are utterly unable to attain to any knowledge
of the constitution of the soul, in so far as relates to the
possibility of its existence apart from external objects.

And, indeed, how should it be possible, merely by the aid of the unity
of consciousness—which we cognize only for the reason that it is
indispensable to the possibility of experience—to pass the bounds of
experience (our existence in this life); and to extend our cognition to
the nature of all thinking beings by means of the empirical—but in
relation to every sort of intuition, perfectly
undetermined—proposition, “I think”?

There does not then exist any rational psychology as a doctrine
furnishing any addition to our knowledge of ourselves. It is nothing
more than a discipline, which sets impassable limits to speculative
reason in this region of thought, to prevent it, on the one hand, from
throwing itself into the arms of a soulless materialism, and, on the
other, from losing itself in the mazes of a baseless spiritualism. It
teaches us to consider this refusal of our reason to give any
satisfactory answer to questions which reach beyond the limits of this
our human life, as a hint to abandon fruitless speculation; and to
direct, to a practical use, our knowledge of ourselves—which, although
applicable only to objects of experience, receives its principles from
a higher source, and regulates its procedure as if our destiny reached
far beyond the boundaries of experience and life.

From all this it is evident that rational psychology has its origin in
a mere misunderstanding. The unity of consciousness, which lies at the
basis of the categories, is considered to be an intuition of the
subject as an object; and the category of substance is applied to the
intuition. But this unity is nothing more than the unity in thought, by
which no object is given; to which therefore the category of
substance—which always presupposes a given intuition—cannot be applied.
Consequently, the subject cannot be cognized. The subject of the
categories cannot, therefore, for the very reason that it cogitates
these, frame any conception of itself as an object of the categories;
for, to cogitate these, it must lay at the foundation its own pure
self-consciousness—the very thing that it wishes to explain and
describe. In like manner, the subject, in which the representation of
time has its basis, cannot determine, for this very reason, its own
existence in time. Now, if the latter is impossible, the former, as an
attempt to determine itself by means of the categories as a thinking
being in general, is no less so.[47]

 [47] The “I think” is, as has been already stated, an empirical
 proposition, and contains the proposition, “I exist.” But I cannot
 say, “Everything, which thinks, exists”; for in this case the property
 of thought would constitute all beings possessing it, necessary
 beings. Hence my existence cannot be considered as an inference from
 the proposition, “I think,” as Descartes maintained—because in this
 case the major premiss, “Everything, which thinks, exists,” must
 precede—but the two propositions are identical. The proposition, “I
 think,” expresses an undetermined empirical intuition, that perception
 (proving consequently that sensation, which must belong to
 sensibility, lies at the foundation of this proposition); but it
 precedes experience, whose province it is to determine an object of
 perception by means of the categories in relation to time; and
 existence in this proposition is not a category, as it does not apply
 to an undetermined given object, but only to one of which we have a
 conception, and about which we wish to know whether it does or does
 not exist, out of, and apart from this conception. An undetermined
 perception signifies here merely something real that has been given,
 only, however, to thought in general—but not as a phenomenon, nor as a
 thing in itself (noumenon), but only as something that really exists,
 and is designated as such in the proposition, “I think.” For it must
 be remarked that, when I call the proposition, “I think,” an empirical
 proposition, I do not thereby mean that the Ego in the proposition is
 an empirical representation; on the contrary, it is purely
 intellectual, because it belongs to thought in general. But without
 some empirical representation, which presents to the mind material for
 thought, the mental act, “I think,” would not take place; and the
 empirical is only the condition of the application or employment of
 the pure intellectual faculty.

Thus, then, appears the vanity of the hope of establishing a cognition
which is to extend its rule beyond the limits of experience—a cognition
which is one of the highest interests of humanity; and thus is proved
the futility of the attempt of speculative philosophy in this region of
thought. But, in this interest of thought, the severity of criticism
has rendered to reason a not unimportant service, by the demonstration
of the impossibility of making any dogmatical affirmation concerning an
object of experience beyond the boundaries of experience. She has thus
fortified reason against all affirmations of the contrary. Now, this
can be accomplished in only two ways. Either our proposition must be
proved apodeictically; or, if this is unsuccessful, the sources of this
inability must be sought for, and, if these are discovered to exist in
the natural and necessary limitation of our reason, our opponents must
submit to the same law of renunciation and refrain from advancing
claims to dogmatic assertion.

But the right, say rather the necessity to admit a future life, upon
principles of the practical conjoined with the speculative use of
reason, has lost nothing by this renunciation; for the merely
speculative proof has never had any influence upon the common reason of
men. It stands upon the point of a hair, so that even the schools have
been able to preserve it from falling only by incessantly discussing it
and spinning it like a top; and even in their eyes it has never been
able to present any safe foundation for the erection of a theory. The
proofs which have been current among men, preserve their value
undiminished; nay, rather gain in clearness and unsophisticated power,
by the rejection of the dogmatical assumptions of speculative reason.
For reason is thus confined within her own peculiar province—the
arrangement of ends or aims, which is at the same time the arrangement
of nature; and, as a practical faculty, without limiting itself to the
latter, it is justified in extending the former, and with it our own
existence, beyond the boundaries of experience and life. If we turn our
attention to the analogy of the nature of living beings in this world,
in the consideration of which reason is obliged to accept as a
principle that no organ, no faculty, no appetite is useless, and that
nothing is superfluous, nothing disproportionate to its use, nothing
unsuited to its end; but that, on the contrary, everything is perfectly
conformed to its destination in life—we shall find that man, who alone
is the final end and aim of this order, is still the only animal that
seems to be excepted from it. For his natural gifts—not merely as
regards the talents and motives that may incite him to employ them, but
especially the moral law in him—stretch so far beyond all mere earthly
utility and advantage, that he feels himself bound to prize the mere
consciousness of probity, apart from all advantageous consequences—even
the shadowy gift of posthumous fame—above everything; and he is
conscious of an inward call to constitute himself, by his conduct in
this world—without regard to mere sublunary interests—the citizen of a
better. This mighty, irresistible proof—accompanied by an
ever-increasing knowledge of the conformability to a purpose in
everything we see around us, by the conviction of the boundless
immensity of creation, by the consciousness of a certain
illimitableness in the possible extension of our knowledge, and by a
desire commensurate therewith—remains to humanity, even after the
theoretical cognition of ourselves has failed to establish the
necessity of an existence after death.

Conclusion of the Solution of the Psychological Paralogism.

The dialectical illusion in rational psychology arises from our
confounding an idea of reason (of a pure intelligence) with the
conception—in every respect undetermined—of a thinking being in
general. I cogitate myself in behalf of a possible experience, at the
same time making abstraction of all actual experience; and infer
therefrom that I can be conscious of myself apart from experience and
its empirical conditions. I consequently confound the possible
abstraction of my empirically determined existence with the supposed
consciousness of a possible separate existence of my thinking self; and
I believe that I cognize what is substantial in myself as a
transcendental subject, when I have nothing more in thought than the
unity of consciousness, which lies at the basis of all determination of
cognition.

The task of explaining the community of the soul with the body does not
properly belong to the psychology of which we are here speaking;
because it proposes to prove the personality of the soul apart from
this communion (after death), and is therefore transcendent in the
proper sense of the word, although occupying itself with an object of
experience—only in so far, however, as it ceases to be an object of
experience. But a sufficient answer may be found to the question in our
system. The difficulty which lies in the execution of this task
consists, as is well known, in the presupposed heterogeneity of the
object of the internal sense (the soul) and the objects of the external
senses; inasmuch as the formal condition of the intuition of the one is
time, and of that of the other space also. But if we consider that both
kinds of objects do not differ internally, but only in so far as the
one appears externally to the other—consequently, that what lies at the
basis of phenomena, as a thing in itself, may not be heterogeneous;
this difficulty disappears. There then remains no other difficulty than
is to be found in the question—how a community of substances is
possible; a question which lies out of the region of psychology, and
which the reader, after what in our analytic has been said of primitive
forces and faculties, will easily judge to be also beyond the region of
human cognition.

GENERAL REMARK

On the Transition from Rational Psychology to Cosmology.

The proposition, “I think,” or, “I exist thinking,” is an empirical
proposition. But such a proposition must be based on empirical
intuition, and the object cogitated as a phenomenon; and thus our
theory appears to maintain that the soul, even in thought, is merely a
phenomenon; and in this way our consciousness itself, in fact, abuts
upon nothing.

Thought, per se, is merely the purely spontaneous logical function
which operates to connect the manifold of a possible intuition; and it
does not represent the subject of consciousness as a phenomenon—for
this reason alone, that it pays no attention to the question whether
the mode of intuiting it is sensuous or intellectual. I therefore do
not represent myself in thought either as I am, or as I appear to
myself; I merely cogitate myself as an object in general, of the mode
of intuiting which I make abstraction. When I represent myself as the
subject of thought, or as the ground of thought, these modes of
representation are not related to the categories of substance or of
cause; for these are functions of thought applicable only to our
sensuous intuition. The application of these categories to the Ego
would, however, be necessary, if I wished to make myself an object of
knowledge. But I wish to be conscious of myself only as thinking; in
what mode my Self is given in intuition, I do not consider, and it may
be that I, who think, am a phenomenon—although not in so far as I am a
thinking being; but in the consciousness of myself in mere thought I am
a being, though this consciousness does not present to me any property
of this being as material for thought.

But the proposition, “I think,” in so far as it declares, “I exist
thinking,” is not the mere representation of a logical function. It
determines the subject (which is in this case an object also) in
relation to existence; and it cannot be given without the aid of the
internal sense, whose intuition presents to us an object, not as a
thing in itself, but always as a phenomenon. In this proposition there
is therefore something more to be found than the mere spontaneity of
thought; there is also the receptivity of intuition, that is, my
thought of myself applied to the empirical intuition of myself. Now, in
this intuition the thinking self must seek the conditions of the
employment of its logical functions as categories of substance, cause,
and so forth; not merely for the purpose of distinguishing itself as an
object in itself by means of the representation “I,” but also for the
purpose of determining the mode of its existence, that is, of cognizing
itself as noumenon. But this is impossible, for the internal empirical
intuition is sensuous, and presents us with nothing but phenomenal
data, which do not assist the object of pure consciousness in its
attempt to cognize itself as a separate existence, but are useful only
as contributions to experience.

But, let it be granted that we could discover, not in experience, but
in certain firmly-established à priori laws of the use of pure
reason—laws relating to our existence, authority to consider ourselves
as legislating à priori in relation to our own existence and as
determining this existence; we should, on this supposition, find
ourselves possessed of a spontaneity, by which our actual existence
would be determinable, without the aid of the conditions of empirical
intuition. We should also become aware that in the consciousness of our
existence there was an à priori content, which would serve to determine
our own existence—an existence only sensuously determinable—relatively,
however, to a certain internal faculty in relation to an intelligible
world.

But this would not give the least help to the attempts of rational
psychology. For this wonderful faculty, which the consciousness of the
moral law in me reveals, would present me with a principle of the
determination of my own existence which is purely intellectual—but by
what predicates? By none other than those which are given in sensuous
intuition. Thus I should find myself in the same position in rational
psychology which I formerly occupied, that is to say, I should find
myself still in need of sensuous intuitions, in order to give
significance to my conceptions of substance and cause, by means of
which alone I can possess a knowledge of myself: but these intuitions
can never raise me above the sphere of experience. I should be
justified, however, in applying these conceptions, in regard to their
practical use, which is always directed to objects of experience—in
conformity with their analogical significance when employed
theoretically—to freedom and its subject. At the same time, I should
understand by them merely the logical functions of subject and
predicate, of principle and consequence, in conformity with which all
actions are so determined, that they are capable of being explained
along with the laws of nature, conformably to the categories of
substance and cause, although they originate from a very different
principle. We have made these observations for the purpose of guarding
against misunderstanding, to which the doctrine of our intuition of
self as a phenomenon is exposed. We shall have occasion to perceive
their utility in the sequel.

Chapter II. The Antinomy of Pure Reason

We showed in the introduction to this part of our work, that all
transcendental illusion of pure reason arose from dialectical
arguments, the schema of which logic gives us in its three formal
species of syllogisms—just as the categories find their logical schema
in the four functions of all judgements. The first kind of these
sophistical arguments related to the unconditioned unity of the
subjective conditions of all representations in general (of the subject
or soul), in correspondence with the categorical syllogisms, the major
of which, as the principle, enounces the relation of a predicate to a
subject. The second kind of dialectical argument will therefore be
concerned, following the analogy with hypothetical syllogisms, with the
unconditioned unity of the objective conditions in the phenomenon; and,
in this way, the theme of the third kind to be treated of in the
following chapter will be the unconditioned unity of the objective
conditions of the possibility of objects in general.

But it is worthy of remark that the transcendental paralogism produced
in the mind only a one-third illusion, in regard to the idea of the
subject of our thought; and the conceptions of reason gave no ground to
maintain the contrary proposition. The advantage is completely on the
side of Pneumatism; although this theory itself passes into naught, in
the crucible of pure reason.

Very different is the case when we apply reason to the objective
synthesis of phenomena. Here, certainly, reason establishes, with much
plausibility, its principle of unconditioned unity; but it very soon
falls into such contradictions that it is compelled, in relation to
cosmology, to renounce its pretensions.

For here a new phenomenon of human reason meets us—a perfectly natural
antithetic, which does not require to be sought for by subtle
sophistry, but into which reason of itself unavoidably falls. It is
thereby preserved, to be sure, from the slumber of a fancied
conviction—which a merely one-sided illusion produces; but it is at the
same time compelled, either, on the one hand, to abandon itself to a
despairing scepticism, or, on the other, to assume a dogmatical
confidence and obstinate persistence in certain assertions, without
granting a fair hearing to the other side of the question. Either is
the death of a sound philosophy, although the former might perhaps
deserve the title of the euthanasia of pure reason.

Before entering this region of discord and confusion, which the
conflict of the laws of pure reason (antinomy) produces, we shall
present the reader with some considerations, in explanation and
justification of the method we intend to follow in our treatment of
this subject. I term all transcendental ideas, in so far as they relate
to the absolute totality in the synthesis of phenomena, cosmical
conceptions; partly on account of this unconditioned totality, on which
the conception of the world-whole is based—a conception, which is
itself an idea—partly because they relate solely to the synthesis of
phenomena—the empirical synthesis; while, on the other hand, the
absolute totality in the synthesis of the conditions of all possible
things gives rise to an ideal of pure reason, which is quite distinct
from the cosmical conception, although it stands in relation with it.
Hence, as the paralogisms of pure reason laid the foundation for a
dialectical psychology, the antinomy of pure reason will present us
with the transcendental principles of a pretended pure (rational)
cosmology—not, however, to declare it valid and to appropriate it,
but—as the very term of a conflict of reason sufficiently indicates, to
present it as an idea which cannot be reconciled with phenomena and
experience.

Section I. System of Cosmological Ideas

That we may be able to enumerate with systematic precision these ideas
according to a principle, we must remark, in the first place, that it
is from the understanding alone that pure and transcendental
conceptions take their origin; that the reason does not properly give
birth to any conception, but only frees the conception of the
understanding from the unavoidable limitation of a possible experience,
and thus endeavours to raise it above the empirical, though it must
still be in connection with it. This happens from the fact that, for a
given conditioned, reason demands absolute totality on the side of the
conditions (to which the understanding submits all phenomena), and thus
makes of the category a transcendental idea. This it does that it may
be able to give absolute completeness to the empirical synthesis, by
continuing it to the unconditioned (which is not to be found in
experience, but only in the idea). Reason requires this according to
the principle: If the conditioned is given the whole of the conditions,
and consequently the absolutely unconditioned, is also given, whereby
alone the former was possible. First, then, the transcendental ideas
are properly nothing but categories elevated to the unconditioned; and
they may be arranged in a table according to the titles of the latter.
But, secondly, all the categories are not available for this purpose,
but only those in which the synthesis constitutes a series—of
conditions subordinated to, not co-ordinated with, each other. Absolute
totality is required of reason only in so far as concerns the ascending
series of the conditions of a conditioned; not, consequently, when the
question relates to the descending series of consequences, or to the
aggregate of the co-ordinated conditions of these consequences. For, in
relation to a given conditioned, conditions are presupposed and
considered to be given along with it. On the other hand, as the
consequences do not render possible their conditions, but rather
presuppose them—in the consideration of the procession of consequences
(or in the descent from the given condition to the conditioned), we may
be quite unconcerned whether the series ceases or not; and their
totality is not a necessary demand of reason.

Thus we cogitate—and necessarily—a given time completely elapsed up to
a given moment, although that time is not determinable by us. But as
regards time future, which is not the condition of arriving at the
present, in order to conceive it; it is quite indifferent whether we
consider future time as ceasing at some point, or as prolonging itself
to infinity. Take, for example, the series m, n, o, in which n is given
as conditioned in relation to m, but at the same time as the condition
of o, and let the series proceed upwards from the conditioned n to m
(l, k, i, etc.), and also downwards from the condition n to the
conditioned o (p, q, r, etc.)—I must presuppose the former series, to
be able to consider n as given, and n is according to reason (the
totality of conditions) possible only by means of that series. But its
possibility does not rest on the following series o, p, q, r, which for
this reason cannot be regarded as given, but only as capable of being
given (dabilis).

I shall term the synthesis of the series on the side of the
conditions—from that nearest to the given phenomenon up to the more
remote—regressive; that which proceeds on the side of the conditioned,
from the immediate consequence to the more remote, I shall call the
progressive synthesis. The former proceeds in antecedentia, the latter
in consequentia. The cosmological ideas are therefore occupied with the
totality of the regressive synthesis, and proceed in antecedentia, not
in consequentia. When the latter takes place, it is an arbitrary and
not a necessary problem of pure reason; for we require, for the
complete understanding of what is given in a phenomenon, not the
consequences which succeed, but the grounds or principles which
precede.

In order to construct the table of ideas in correspondence with the
table of categories, we take first the two primitive quanta of all our
intuitions, time and space. Time is in itself a series (and the formal
condition of all series), and hence, in relation to a given present, we
must distinguish à priori in it the antecedentia as conditions (time
past) from the consequentia (time future). Consequently, the
transcendental idea of the absolute totality of the series of the
conditions of a given conditioned, relates merely to all past time.
According to the idea of reason, the whole past time, as the condition
of the given moment, is necessarily cogitated as given. But, as regards
space, there exists in it no distinction between progressus and
regressus; for it is an aggregate and not a series—its parts existing
together at the same time. I can consider a given point of time in
relation to past time only as conditioned, because this given moment
comes into existence only through the past time rather through the
passing of the preceding time. But as the parts of space are not
subordinated, but co-ordinated to each other, one part cannot be the
condition of the possibility of the other; and space is not in itself,
like time, a series. But the synthesis of the manifold parts of
space—(the syntheses whereby we apprehend space)—is nevertheless
successive; it takes place, therefore, in time, and contains a series.
And as in this series of aggregated spaces (for example, the feet in a
rood), beginning with a given portion of space, those which continue to
be annexed form the condition of the limits of the former—the
measurement of a space must also be regarded as a synthesis of the
series of the conditions of a given conditioned. It differs, however,
in this respect from that of time, that the side of the conditioned is
not in itself distinguishable from the side of the condition; and,
consequently, regressus and progressus in space seem to be identical.
But, inasmuch as one part of space is not given, but only limited, by
and through another, we must also consider every limited space as
conditioned, in so far as it presupposes some other space as the
condition of its limitation, and so on. As regards limitation,
therefore, our procedure in space is also a regressus, and the
transcendental idea of the absolute totality of the synthesis in a
series of conditions applies to space also; and I am entitled to demand
the absolute totality of the phenomenal synthesis in space as well as
in time. Whether my demand can be satisfied is a question to be
answered in the sequel.

Secondly, the real in space—that is, matter—is conditioned. Its
internal conditions are its parts, and the parts of parts its remote
conditions; so that in this case we find a regressive synthesis, the
absolute totality of which is a demand of reason. But this cannot be
obtained otherwise than by a complete division of parts, whereby the
real in matter becomes either nothing or that which is not matter, that
is to say, the simple. Consequently we find here also a series of
conditions and a progress to the unconditioned.

Thirdly, as regards the categories of a real relation between
phenomena, the category of substance and its accidents is not suitable
for the formation of a transcendental idea; that is to say, reason has
no ground, in regard to it, to proceed regressively with conditions.
For accidents (in so far as they inhere in a substance) are
co-ordinated with each other, and do not constitute a series. And, in
relation to substance, they are not properly subordinated to it, but
are the mode of existence of the substance itself. The conception of
the substantial might nevertheless seem to be an idea of the
transcendental reason. But, as this signifies nothing more than the
conception of an object in general, which subsists in so far as we
cogitate in it merely a transcendental subject without any predicates;
and as the question here is of an unconditioned in the series of
phenomena—it is clear that the substantial can form no member thereof.
The same holds good of substances in community, which are mere
aggregates and do not form a series. For they are not subordinated to
each other as conditions of the possibility of each other; which,
however, may be affirmed of spaces, the limits of which are never
determined in themselves, but always by some other space. It is,
therefore, only in the category of causality that we can find a series
of causes to a given effect, and in which we ascend from the latter, as
the conditioned, to the former as the conditions, and thus answer the
question of reason.

Fourthly, the conceptions of the possible, the actual, and the
necessary do not conduct us to any series—excepting only in so far as
the contingent in existence must always be regarded as conditioned, and
as indicating, according to a law of the understanding, a condition,
under which it is necessary to rise to a higher, till in the totality
of the series, reason arrives at unconditioned necessity.

There are, accordingly, only four cosmological ideas, corresponding
with the four titles of the categories. For we can select only such as
necessarily furnish us with a series in the synthesis of the manifold.

                      1
            The absolute Completeness
                    of the
                 COMPOSITION
     of the given totality of all phenomena.

                      2
            The absolute Completeness
                    of the
                   DIVISION
     of given totality in a phenomenon.

                       3
            The absolute Completeness
                     of the
                   ORIGINATION
                  of a phenomenon.

                       4
            The absolute Completeness
         of the DEPENDENCE of the EXISTENCE
        of what is changeable in a phenomenon.

We must here remark, in the first place, that the idea of absolute
totality relates to nothing but the exposition of phenomena, and
therefore not to the pure conception of a totality of things. Phenomena
are here, therefore, regarded as given, and reason requires the
absolute completeness of the conditions of their possibility, in so far
as these conditions constitute a series—consequently an absolutely
(that is, in every respect) complete synthesis, whereby a phenomenon
can be explained according to the laws of the understanding.

Secondly, it is properly the unconditioned alone that reason seeks in
this serially and regressively conducted synthesis of conditions. It
wishes, to speak in another way, to attain to completeness in the
series of premisses, so as to render it unnecessary to presuppose
others. This unconditioned is always contained in the absolute totality
of the series, when we endeavour to form a representation of it in
thought. But this absolutely complete synthesis is itself but an idea;
for it is impossible, at least before hand, to know whether any such
synthesis is possible in the case of phenomena. When we represent all
existence in thought by means of pure conceptions of the understanding,
without any conditions of sensuous intuition, we may say with justice
that for a given conditioned the whole series of conditions
subordinated to each other is also given; for the former is only given
through the latter. But we find in the case of phenomena a particular
limitation of the mode in which conditions are given, that is, through
the successive synthesis of the manifold of intuition, which must be
complete in the regress. Now whether this completeness is sensuously
possible, is a problem. But the idea of it lies in the reason—be it
possible or impossible to connect with the idea adequate empirical
conceptions. Therefore, as in the absolute totality of the regressive
synthesis of the manifold in a phenomenon (following the guidance of
the categories, which represent it as a series of conditions to a given
conditioned) the unconditioned is necessarily contained—it being still
left unascertained whether and how this totality exists; reason sets
out from the idea of totality, although its proper and final aim is the
unconditioned—of the whole series, or of a part thereof.

This unconditioned may be cogitated—either as existing only in the
entire series, all the members of which therefore would be without
exception conditioned and only the totality absolutely
unconditioned—and in this case the regressus is called infinite; or the
absolutely unconditioned is only a part of the series, to which the
other members are subordinated, but which Is not itself submitted to
any other condition.[48] In the former case the series is a parte
priori unlimited (without beginning), that is, infinite, and
nevertheless completely given. But the regress in it is never
completed, and can only be called potentially infinite. In the second
case there exists a first in the series. This first is called, in
relation to past time, the beginning of the world; in relation to
space, the limit of the world; in relation to the parts of a given
limited whole, the simple; in relation to causes, absolute spontaneity
(liberty); and in relation to the existence of changeable things,
absolute physical necessity.

 [48] The absolute totality of the series of conditions to a given
 conditioned is always unconditioned; because beyond it there exist no
 other conditions, on which it might depend. But the absolute totality
 of such a series is only an idea, or rather a problematical
 conception, the possibility of which must be investigated—particularly
 in relation to the mode in which the unconditioned, as the
 transcendental idea which is the real subject of inquiry, may be
 contained therein.

We possess two expressions, world and nature, which are generally
interchanged. The first denotes the mathematical total of all phenomena
and the totality of their synthesis—in its progress by means of
composition, as well as by division. And the world is termed
nature,[49] when it is regarded as a dynamical whole—when our attention
is not directed to the aggregation in space and time, for the purpose
of cogitating it as a quantity, but to the unity in the existence of
phenomena. In this case the condition of that which happens is called a
cause; the unconditioned causality of the cause in a phenomenon is
termed liberty; the conditioned cause is called in a more limited sense
a natural cause. The conditioned in existence is termed contingent, and
the unconditioned necessary. The unconditioned necessity of phenomena
may be called natural necessity.

 [49] Nature, understood adjective (formaliter), signifies the complex
 of the determinations of a thing, connected according to an internal
 principle of causality. On the other hand, we understand by nature,
 substantive (materialiter), the sum total of phenomena, in so far as
 they, by virtue of an internal principle of causality, are connected
 with each other throughout. In the former sense we speak of the nature
 of liquid matter, of fire, etc., and employ the word only adjective;
 while, if speaking of the objects of nature, we have in our minds the
 idea of a subsisting whole.

The ideas which we are at present engaged in discussing I have called
cosmological ideas; partly because by the term world is understood the
entire content of all phenomena, and our ideas are directed solely to
the unconditioned among phenomena; partly also, because world, in the
transcendental sense, signifies the absolute totality of the content of
existing things, and we are directing our attention only to the
completeness of the synthesis—although, properly, only in regression.
In regard to the fact that these ideas are all transcendent, and,
although they do not transcend phenomena as regards their mode, but are
concerned solely with the world of sense (and not with noumena),
nevertheless carry their synthesis to a degree far above all possible
experience—it still seems to me that we can, with perfect propriety,
designate them cosmical conceptions. As regards the distinction between
the mathematically and the dynamically unconditioned which is the aim
of the regression of the synthesis, I should call the two former, in a
more limited signification, cosmical conceptions, the remaining two
transcendent physical conceptions. This distinction does not at present
seem to be of particular importance, but we shall afterwards find it to
be of some value.

Section II. Antithetic of Pure Reason

Thetic is the term applied to every collection of dogmatical
propositions. By antithetic I do not understand dogmatical assertions
of the opposite, but the self-contradiction of seemingly dogmatical
cognitions (thesis cum antithesis), in none of which we can discover
any decided superiority. Antithetic is not, therefore, occupied with
one-sided statements, but is engaged in considering the contradictory
nature of the general cognitions of reason and its causes.
Transcendental antithetic is an investigation into the antinomy of pure
reason, its causes and result. If we employ our reason not merely in
the application of the principles of the understanding to objects of
experience, but venture with it beyond these boundaries, there arise
certain sophistical propositions or theorems. These assertions have the
following peculiarities: They can find neither confirmation nor
confutation in experience; and each is in itself not only
self-consistent, but possesses conditions of its necessity in the very
nature of reason—only that, unluckily, there exist just as valid and
necessary grounds for maintaining the contrary proposition.

The questions which naturally arise in the consideration of this
dialectic of pure reason, are therefore: 1st. In what propositions is
pure reason unavoidably subject to an antinomy? 2nd. What are the
causes of this antinomy? 3rd. Whether and in what way can reason free
itself from this self-contradiction?

A dialectical proposition or theorem of pure reason must, according to
what has been said, be distinguishable from all sophistical
propositions, by the fact that it is not an answer to an arbitrary
question, which may be raised at the mere pleasure of any person, but
to one which human reason must necessarily encounter in its progress.
In the second place, a dialectical proposition, with its opposite, does
not carry the appearance of a merely artificial illusion, which
disappears as soon as it is investigated, but a natural and unavoidable
illusion, which, even when we are no longer deceived by it, continues
to mock us and, although rendered harmless, can never be completely
removed.

This dialectical doctrine will not relate to the unity of understanding
in empirical conceptions, but to the unity of reason in pure ideas. The
conditions of this doctrine are—inasmuch as it must, as a synthesis
according to rules, be conformable to the understanding, and at the
same time as the absolute unity of the synthesis, to the reason—that,
if it is adequate to the unity of reason, it is too great for the
understanding, if according with the understanding, it is too small for
the reason. Hence arises a mutual opposition, which cannot be avoided,
do what we will.

These sophistical assertions of dialectic open, as it were, a
battle-field, where that side obtains the victory which has been
permitted to make the attack, and he is compelled to yield who has been
unfortunately obliged to stand on the defensive. And hence, champions
of ability, whether on the right or on the wrong side, are certain to
carry away the crown of victory, if they only take care to have the
right to make the last attack, and are not obliged to sustain another
onset from their opponent. We can easily believe that this arena has
been often trampled by the feet of combatants, that many victories have
been obtained on both sides, but that the last victory, decisive of the
affair between the contending parties, was won by him who fought for
the right, only if his adversary was forbidden to continue the tourney.
As impartial umpires, we must lay aside entirely the consideration
whether the combatants are fighting for the right or for the wrong
side, for the true or for the false, and allow the combat to be first
decided. Perhaps, after they have wearied more than injured each other,
they will discover the nothingness of their cause of quarrel and part
good friends.

This method of watching, or rather of originating, a conflict of
assertions, not for the purpose of finally deciding in favour of either
side, but to discover whether the object of the struggle is not a mere
illusion, which each strives in vain to reach, but which would be no
gain even when reached—this procedure, I say, may be termed the
sceptical method. It is thoroughly distinct from scepticism—the
principle of a technical and scientific ignorance, which undermines the
foundations of all knowledge, in order, if possible, to destroy our
belief and confidence therein. For the sceptical method aims at
certainty, by endeavouring to discover in a conflict of this kind,
conducted honestly and intelligently on both sides, the point of
misunderstanding; just as wise legislators derive, from the
embarrassment of judges in lawsuits, information in regard to the
defective and ill-defined parts of their statutes. The antinomy which
reveals itself in the application of laws, is for our limited wisdom
the best criterion of legislation. For the attention of reason, which
in abstract speculation does not easily become conscious of its errors,
is thus roused to the momenta in the determination of its principles.

But this sceptical method is essentially peculiar to transcendental
philosophy, and can perhaps be dispensed with in every other field of
investigation. In mathematics its use would be absurd; because in it no
false assertions can long remain hidden, inasmuch as its demonstrations
must always proceed under the guidance of pure intuition, and by means
of an always evident synthesis. In experimental philosophy, doubt and
delay may be very useful; but no misunderstanding is possible, which
cannot be easily removed; and in experience means of solving the
difficulty and putting an end to the dissension must at last be found,
whether sooner or later. Moral philosophy can always exhibit its
principles, with their practical consequences, in concreto—at least in
possible experiences, and thus escape the mistakes and ambiguities of
abstraction. But transcendental propositions, which lay claim to
insight beyond the region of possible experience, cannot, on the one
hand, exhibit their abstract synthesis in any à priori intuition, nor,
on the other, expose a lurking error by the help of experience.
Transcendental reason, therefore, presents us with no other criterion
than that of an attempt to reconcile such assertions, and for this
purpose to permit a free and unrestrained conflict between them. And
this we now proceed to arrange.[50]

 [50] The antinomies stand in the order of the four transcendental
 ideas above detailed.

FIRST CONFLICT OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS. THESIS.

The world has a beginning in time, and is also limited in regard to
space.

PROOF.

Granted that the world has no beginning in time; up to every given
moment of time, an eternity must have elapsed, and therewith passed
away an infinite series of successive conditions or states of things in
the world. Now the infinity of a series consists in the fact that it
never can be completed by means of a successive synthesis. It follows
that an infinite series already elapsed is impossible and that,
consequently, a beginning of the world is a necessary condition of its
existence. And this was the first thing to be proved.

As regards the second, let us take the opposite for granted. In this
case, the world must be an infinite given total of coexistent things.
Now we cannot cogitate the dimensions of a quantity, which is not given
within certain limits of an intuition,[51] in any other way than by
means of the synthesis of its parts, and the total of such a quantity
only by means of a completed synthesis, or the repeated addition of
unity to itself. Accordingly, to cogitate the world, which fills all
spaces, as a whole, the successive synthesis of the parts of an
infinite world must be looked upon as completed, that is to say, an
infinite time must be regarded as having elapsed in the enumeration of
all co-existing things; which is impossible. For this reason an
infinite aggregate of actual things cannot be considered as a given
whole, consequently, not as a contemporaneously given whole. The world
is consequently, as regards extension in space, not infinite, but
enclosed in limits. And this was the second thing to be proved.

 [51] We may consider an undetermined quantity as a whole, when it is
 enclosed within limits, although we cannot construct or ascertain its
 totality by measurement, that is, by the successive synthesis of its
 parts. For its limits of themselves determine its completeness as a
 whole.

ANTITHESIS.

The world has no beginning, and no limits in space, but is, in relation
both to time and space, infinite.

PROOF.

For let it be granted that it has a beginning. A beginning is an
existence which is preceded by a time in which the thing does not
exist. On the above supposition, it follows that there must have been a
time in which the world did not exist, that is, a void time. But in a
void time the origination of a thing is impossible; because no part of
any such time contains a distinctive condition of being, in preference
to that of non-being (whether the supposed thing originate of itself,
or by means of some other cause). Consequently, many series of things
may have a beginning in the world, but the world itself cannot have a
beginning, and is, therefore, in relation to past time, infinite.

As regards the second statement, let us first take the opposite for
granted—that the world is finite and limited in space; it follows that
it must exist in a void space, which is not limited. We should
therefore meet not only with a relation of things in space, but also a
relation of things to space. Now, as the world is an absolute whole,
out of and beyond which no object of intuition, and consequently no
correlate to which can be discovered, this relation of the world to a
void space is merely a relation to no object. But such a relation, and
consequently the limitation of the world by void space, is nothing.
Consequently, the world, as regards space, is not limited, that is, it
is infinite in regard to extension.[52]

 [52] Space is merely the form of external intuition (formal
 intuition), and not a real object which can be externally perceived.
 Space, prior to all things which determine it (fill or limit it), or,
 rather, which present an empirical intuition conformable to it, is,
 under the title of absolute space, nothing but the mere possibility of
 external phenomena, in so far as they either exist in themselves, or
 can annex themselves to given intuitions. Empirical intuition is
 therefore not a composition of phenomena and space (of perception and
 empty intuition). The one is not the correlate of the other in a
 synthesis, but they are vitally connected in the same empirical
 intuition, as matter and form. If we wish to set one of these two
 apart from the other—space from phenomena—there arise all sorts of
 empty determinations of external intuition, which are very far from
 being possible perceptions. For example, motion or rest of the world
 in an infinite empty space, or a determination of the mutual relation
 of both, cannot possibly be perceived, and is therefore merely the
 predicate of a notional entity.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE FIRST ANTINOMY. ON THE THESIS.

In bringing forward these conflicting arguments, I have not been on the
search for sophisms, for the purpose of availing myself of special
pleading, which takes advantage of the carelessness of the opposite
party, appeals to a misunderstood statute, and erects its unrighteous
claims upon an unfair interpretation. Both proofs originate fairly from
the nature of the case, and the advantage presented by the mistakes of
the dogmatists of both parties has been completely set aside.

The thesis might also have been unfairly demonstrated, by the
introduction of an erroneous conception of the infinity of a given
quantity. A quantity is infinite, if a greater than itself cannot
possibly exist. The quantity is measured by the number of given
units—which are taken as a standard—contained in it. Now no number can
be the greatest, because one or more units can always be added. It
follows that an infinite given quantity, consequently an infinite world
(both as regards time and extension) is impossible. It is, therefore,
limited in both respects. In this manner I might have conducted my
proof; but the conception given in it does not agree with the true
conception of an infinite whole. In this there is no representation of
its quantity, it is not said how large it is; consequently its
conception is not the conception of a maximum. We cogitate in it merely
its relation to an arbitrarily assumed unit, in relation to which it is
greater than any number. Now, just as the unit which is taken is
greater or smaller, the infinite will be greater or smaller; but the
infinity, which consists merely in the relation to this given unit,
must remain always the same, although the absolute quantity of the
whole is not thereby cognized.

The true (transcendental) conception of infinity is: that the
successive synthesis of unity in the measurement of a given quantum can
never be completed.[53] Hence it follows, without possibility of
mistake, that an eternity of actual successive states up to a given
(the present) moment cannot have elapsed, and that the world must
therefore have a beginning.

 [53] The quantum in this sense contains a congeries of given units,
 which is greater than any number—and this is the mathematical
 conception of the infinite.

In regard to the second part of the thesis, the difficulty as to an
infinite and yet elapsed series disappears; for the manifold of a world
infinite in extension is contemporaneously given. But, in order to
cogitate the total of this manifold, as we cannot have the aid of
limits constituting by themselves this total in intuition, we are
obliged to give some account of our conception, which in this case
cannot proceed from the whole to the determined quantity of the parts,
but must demonstrate the possibility of a whole by means of a
successive synthesis of the parts. But as this synthesis must
constitute a series that cannot be completed, it is impossible for us
to cogitate prior to it, and consequently not by means of it, a
totality. For the conception of totality itself is in the present case
the representation of a completed synthesis of the parts; and this
completion, and consequently its conception, is impossible.

ON THE ANTITHESIS.

The proof in favour of the infinity of the cosmical succession and the
cosmical content is based upon the consideration that, in the opposite
case, a void time and a void space must constitute the limits of the
world. Now I am not unaware, that there are some ways of escaping this
conclusion. It may, for example, be alleged, that a limit to the world,
as regards both space and time, is quite possible, without at the same
time holding the existence of an absolute time before the beginning of
the world, or an absolute space extending beyond the actual world—which
is impossible. I am quite well satisfied with the latter part of this
opinion of the philosophers of the Leibnitzian school. Space is merely
the form of external intuition, but not a real object which can itself
be externally intuited; it is not a correlate of phenomena, it is the
form of phenomena itself. Space, therefore, cannot be regarded as
absolutely and in itself something determinative of the existence of
things, because it is not itself an object, but only the form of
possible objects. Consequently, things, as phenomena, determine space;
that is to say, they render it possible that, of all the possible
predicates of space (size and relation), certain may belong to reality.
But we cannot affirm the converse, that space, as something
self-subsistent, can determine real things in regard to size or shape,
for it is in itself not a real thing. Space (filled or void)[54] may
therefore be limited by phenomena, but phenomena cannot be limited by
an empty space without them. This is true of time also. All this being
granted, it is nevertheless indisputable, that we must assume these two
nonentities, void space without and void time before the world, if we
assume the existence of cosmical limits, relatively to space or time.

 [54] It is evident that what is meant here is, that empty space, in so
 far as it is limited by phenomena—space, that is, within the
 world—does not at least contradict transcendental principles, and may
 therefore, as regards them, be admitted, although its possibility
 cannot on that account be affirmed.

For, as regards the subterfuge adopted by those who endeavour to evade
the consequence—that, if the world is limited as to space and time, the
infinite void must determine the existence of actual things in regard
to their dimensions—it arises solely from the fact that instead of a
sensuous world, an intelligible world—of which nothing is known—is
cogitated; instead of a real beginning (an existence, which is preceded
by a period in which nothing exists), an existence which presupposes no
other condition than that of time; and, instead of limits of extension,
boundaries of the universe. But the question relates to the mundus
phaenomenon, and its quantity; and in this case we cannot make
abstraction of the conditions of sensibility, without doing away with
the essential reality of this world itself. The world of sense, if it
is limited, must necessarily lie in the infinite void. If this, and
with it space as the à priori condition of the possibility of
phenomena, is left out of view, the whole world of sense disappears. In
our problem is this alone considered as given. The mundus
intelligibilis is nothing but the general conception of a world, in
which abstraction has been made of all conditions of intuition, and in
relation to which no synthetical proposition—either affirmative or
negative—is possible.

SECOND CONFLICT OF TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS. THESIS.

Every composite substance in the world consists of simple parts; and
there exists nothing that is not either itself simple, or composed of
simple parts.

PROOF.

For, grant that composite substances do not consist of simple parts; in
this case, if all combination or composition were annihilated in
thought, no composite part, and (as, by the supposition, there do not
exist simple parts) no simple part would exist. Consequently, no
substance; consequently, nothing would exist. Either, then, it is
impossible to annihilate composition in thought; or, after such
annihilation, there must remain something that subsists without
composition, that is, something that is simple. But in the former case
the composite could not itself consist of substances, because with
substances composition is merely a contingent relation, apart from
which they must still exist as self-subsistent beings. Now, as this
case contradicts the supposition, the second must contain the
truth—that the substantial composite in the world consists of simple
parts.

It follows, as an immediate inference, that the things in the world are
all, without exception, simple beings—that composition is merely an
external condition pertaining to them—and that, although we never can
separate and isolate the elementary substances from the state of
composition, reason must cogitate these as the primary subjects of all
composition, and consequently, as prior thereto—and as simple
substances.

ANTITHESIS.

No composite thing in the world consists of simple parts; and there
does not exist in the world any simple substance.

PROOF.

Let it be supposed that a composite thing (as substance) consists of
simple parts. Inasmuch as all external relation, consequently all
composition of substances, is possible only in space; the space,
occupied by that which is composite, must consist of the same number of
parts as is contained in the composite. But space does not consist of
simple parts, but of spaces. Therefore, every part of the composite
must occupy a space. But the absolutely primary parts of what is
composite are simple. It follows that what is simple occupies a space.
Now, as everything real that occupies a space, contains a manifold the
parts of which are external to each other, and is consequently
composite—and a real composite, not of accidents (for these cannot
exist external to each other apart from substance), but of
substances—it follows that the simple must be a substantial composite,
which is self-contradictory.

The second proposition of the antithesis—that there exists in the world
nothing that is simple—is here equivalent to the following: The
existence of the absolutely simple cannot be demonstrated from any
experience or perception either external or internal; and the
absolutely simple is a mere idea, the objective reality of which cannot
be demonstrated in any possible experience; it is consequently, in the
exposition of phenomena, without application and object. For, let us
take for granted that an object may be found in experience for this
transcendental idea; the empirical intuition of such an object must
then be recognized to contain absolutely no manifold with its parts
external to each other, and connected into unity. Now, as we cannot
reason from the non-consciousness of such a manifold to the
impossibility of its existence in the intuition of an object, and as
the proof of this impossibility is necessary for the establishment and
proof of absolute simplicity; it follows that this simplicity cannot be
inferred from any perception whatever. As, therefore, an absolutely
simple object cannot be given in any experience, and the world of sense
must be considered as the sum total of all possible experiences:
nothing simple exists in the world.

This second proposition in the antithesis has a more extended aim than
the first. The first merely banishes the simple from the intuition of
the composite; while the second drives it entirely out of nature. Hence
we were unable to demonstrate it from the conception of a given object
of external intuition (of the composite), but we were obliged to prove
it from the relation of a given object to a possible experience in
general.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE SECOND ANTINOMY. THESIS.

When I speak of a whole, which necessarily consists of simple parts, I
understand thereby only a substantial whole, as the true composite;
that is to say, I understand that contingent unity of the manifold
which is given as perfectly isolated (at least in thought), placed in
reciprocal connection, and thus constituted a unity. Space ought not to
be called a compositum but a totum, for its parts are possible in the
whole, and not the whole by means of the parts. It might perhaps be
called a compositum ideale, but not a compositum reale. But this is of
no importance. As space is not a composite of substances (and not even
of real accidents), if I abstract all composition therein—nothing, not
even a point, remains; for a point is possible only as the limit of a
space—consequently of a composite. Space and time, therefore, do not
consist of simple parts. That which belongs only to the condition or
state of a substance, even although it possesses a quantity (motion or
change, for example), likewise does not consist of simple parts. That
is to say, a certain degree of change does not originate from the
addition of many simple changes. Our inference of the simple from the
composite is valid only of self-subsisting things. But the accidents of
a state are not self-subsistent. The proof, then, for the necessity of
the simple, as the component part of all that is substantial and
composite, may prove a failure, and the whole case of this thesis be
lost, if we carry the proposition too far, and wish to make it valid of
everything that is composite without distinction—as indeed has really
now and then happened. Besides, I am here speaking only of the simple,
in so far as it is necessarily given in the composite—the latter being
capable of solution into the former as its component parts. The proper
signification of the word monas (as employed by Leibnitz) ought to
relate to the simple, given immediately as simple substance (for
example, in consciousness), and not as an element of the composite. As
an element, the term atomus would be more appropriate. And as I wish to
prove the existence of simple substances, only in relation to, and as
the elements of, the composite, I might term the antithesis of the
second Antinomy, transcendental Atomistic. But as this word has long
been employed to designate a particular theory of corporeal phenomena
(moleculae), and thus presupposes a basis of empirical conceptions, I
prefer calling it the dialectical principle of Monadology.

ANTITHESIS.

Against the assertion of the infinite subdivisibility of matter whose
ground of proof is purely mathematical, objections have been alleged by
the Monadists. These objections lay themselves open, at first sight, to
suspicion, from the fact that they do not recognize the clearest
mathematical proofs as propositions relating to the constitution of
space, in so far as it is really the formal condition of the
possibility of all matter, but regard them merely as inferences from
abstract but arbitrary conceptions, which cannot have any application
to real things. Just as if it were possible to imagine another mode of
intuition than that given in the primitive intuition of space; and just
as if its à priori determinations did not apply to everything, the
existence of which is possible, from the fact alone of its filling
space. If we listen to them, we shall find ourselves required to
cogitate, in addition to the mathematical point, which is simple—not,
however, a part, but a mere limit of space—physical points, which are
indeed likewise simple, but possess the peculiar property, as parts of
space, of filling it merely by their aggregation. I shall not repeat
here the common and clear refutations of this absurdity, which are to
be found everywhere in numbers: every one knows that it is impossible
to undermine the evidence of mathematics by mere discursive
conceptions; I shall only remark that, if in this case philosophy
endeavours to gain an advantage over mathematics by sophistical
artifices, it is because it forgets that the discussion relates solely
to Phenomena and their conditions. It is not sufficient to find the
conception of the simple for the pure conception of the composite, but
we must discover for the intuition of the composite (matter), the
intuition of the simple. Now this, according to the laws of
sensibility, and consequently in the case of objects of sense, is
utterly impossible. In the case of a whole composed of substances,
which is cogitated solely by the pure understanding, it may be
necessary to be in possession of the simple before composition is
possible. But this does not hold good of the Totum substantiale
phaenomenon, which, as an empirical intuition in space, possesses the
necessary property of containing no simple part, for the very reason
that no part of space is simple. Meanwhile, the Monadists have been
subtle enough to escape from this difficulty, by presupposing intuition
and the dynamical relation of substances as the condition of the
possibility of space, instead of regarding space as the condition of
the possibility of the objects of external intuition, that is, of
bodies. Now we have a conception of bodies only as phenomena, and, as
such, they necessarily presuppose space as the condition of all
external phenomena. The evasion is therefore in vain; as, indeed, we
have sufficiently shown in our Æsthetic. If bodies were things in
themselves, the proof of the Monadists would be unexceptionable.

The second dialectical assertion possesses the peculiarity of having
opposed to it a dogmatical proposition, which, among all such
sophistical statements, is the only one that undertakes to prove in the
case of an object of experience, that which is properly a
transcendental idea—the absolute simplicity of substance. The
proposition is that the object of the internal sense, the thinking Ego,
is an absolute simple substance. Without at present entering upon this
subject—as it has been considered at length in a former chapter—I shall
merely remark that, if something is cogitated merely as an object,
without the addition of any synthetical determination of its
intuition—as happens in the case of the bare representation, _I_—it is
certain that no manifold and no composition can be perceived in such a
representation. As, moreover, the predicates whereby I cogitate this
object are merely intuitions of the internal sense, there cannot be
discovered in them anything to prove the existence of a manifold whose
parts are external to each other, and, consequently, nothing to prove
the existence of real composition. Consciousness, therefore, is so
constituted that, inasmuch as the thinking subject is at the same time
its own object, it cannot divide itself—although it can divide its
inhering determinations. For every object in relation to itself is
absolute unity. Nevertheless, if the subject is regarded externally, as
an object of intuition, it must, in its character of phenomenon,
possess the property of composition. And it must always be regarded in
this manner, if we wish to know whether there is or is not contained in
it a manifold whose parts are external to each other.

THIRD CONFLICT OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS. THESIS.

Causality according to the laws of nature, is not the only causality
operating to originate the phenomena of the world. A causality of
freedom is also necessary to account fully for these phenomena.

PROOF.

Let it be supposed, that there is no other kind of causality than that
according to the laws of nature. Consequently, everything that happens
presupposes a previous condition, which it follows with absolute
certainty, in conformity with a rule. But this previous condition must
itself be something that has happened (that has arisen in time, as it
did not exist before), for, if it has always been in existence, its
consequence or effect would not thus originate for the first time, but
would likewise have always existed. The causality, therefore, of a
cause, whereby something happens, is itself a thing that has happened.
Now this again presupposes, in conformity with the law of nature, a
previous condition and its causality, and this another anterior to the
former, and so on. If, then, everything happens solely in accordance
with the laws of nature, there cannot be any real first beginning of
things, but only a subaltern or comparative beginning. There cannot,
therefore, be a completeness of series on the side of the causes which
originate the one from the other. But the law of nature is that nothing
can happen without a sufficient à priori determined cause. The
proposition therefore—if all causality is possible only in accordance
with the laws of nature—is, when stated in this unlimited and general
manner, self-contradictory. It follows that this cannot be the only
kind of causality.

From what has been said, it follows that a causality must be admitted,
by means of which something happens, without its cause being determined
according to necessary laws by some other cause preceding. That is to
say, there must exist an absolute spontaneity of cause, which of itself
originates a series of phenomena which proceeds according to natural
laws—consequently transcendental freedom, without which even in the
course of nature the succession of phenomena on the side of causes is
never complete.

ANTITHESIS.

There is no such thing as freedom, but everything in the world happens
solely according to the laws of nature.

PROOF.

Granted, that there does exist freedom in the transcendental sense, as
a peculiar kind of causality, operating to produce events in the
world—a faculty, that is to say, of originating a state, and
consequently a series of consequences from that state. In this case,
not only the series originated by this spontaneity, but the
determination of this spontaneity itself to the production of the
series, that is to say, the causality itself must have an absolute
commencement, such that nothing can precede to determine this action
according to unvarying laws. But every beginning of action presupposes
in the acting cause a state of inaction; and a dynamically primal
beginning of action presupposes a state, which has no connection—as
regards causality—with the preceding state of the cause—which does not,
that is, in any wise result from it. Transcendental freedom is
therefore opposed to the natural law of cause and effect, and such a
conjunction of successive states in effective causes is destructive of
the possibility of unity in experience and for that reason not to be
found in experience—is consequently a mere fiction of thought.

We have, therefore, nothing but nature to which we must look for
connection and order in cosmical events. Freedom—independence of the
laws of nature—is certainly a deliverance from restraint, but it is
also a relinquishing of the guidance of law and rule. For it cannot be
alleged that, instead of the laws of nature, laws of freedom may be
introduced into the causality of the course of nature. For, if freedom
were determined according to laws, it would be no longer freedom, but
merely nature. Nature, therefore, and transcendental freedom are
distinguishable as conformity to law and lawlessness. The former
imposes upon understanding the difficulty of seeking the origin of
events ever higher and higher in the series of causes, inasmuch as
causality is always conditioned thereby; while it compensates this
labour by the guarantee of a unity complete and in conformity with law.
The latter, on the contrary, holds out to the understanding the promise
of a point of rest in the chain of causes, by conducting it to an
unconditioned causality, which professes to have the power of
spontaneous origination, but which, in its own utter blindness,
deprives it of the guidance of rules, by which alone a completely
connected experience is possible.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE THIRD ANTINOMY. ON THE THESIS.

The transcendental idea of freedom is far from constituting the entire
content of the psychological conception so termed, which is for the
most part empirical. It merely presents us with the conception of
spontaneity of action, as the proper ground for imputing freedom to the
cause of a certain class of objects. It is, however, the true
stumbling-stone to philosophy, which meets with unconquerable
difficulties in the way of its admitting this kind of unconditioned
causality. That element in the question of the freedom of the will,
which has for so long a time placed speculative reason in such
perplexity, is properly only transcendental, and concerns the question,
whether there must be held to exist a faculty of spontaneous
origination of a series of successive things or states. How such a
faculty is possible is not a necessary inquiry; for in the case of
natural causality itself, we are obliged to content ourselves with the
à priori knowledge that such a causality must be presupposed, although
we are quite incapable of comprehending how the being of one thing is
possible through the being of another, but must for this information
look entirely to experience. Now we have demonstrated this necessity of
a free first beginning of a series of phenomena, only in so far as it
is required for the comprehension of an origin of the world, all
following states being regarded as a succession according to laws of
nature alone. But, as there has thus been proved the existence of a
faculty which can of itself originate a series in time—although we are
unable to explain how it can exist—we feel ourselves authorized to
admit, even in the midst of the natural course of events, a beginning,
as regards causality, of different successions of phenomena, and at the
same time to attribute to all substances a faculty of free action. But
we ought in this case not to allow ourselves to fall into a common
misunderstanding, and to suppose that, because a successive series in
the world can only have a comparatively first beginning—another state
or condition of things always preceding—an absolutely first beginning
of a series in the course of nature is impossible. For we are not
speaking here of an absolutely first beginning in relation to time, but
as regards causality alone. When, for example, I, completely of my own
free will, and independently of the necessarily determinative influence
of natural causes, rise from my chair, there commences with this event,
including its material consequences in infinitum, an absolutely new
series; although, in relation to time, this event is merely the
continuation of a preceding series. For this resolution and act of mine
do not form part of the succession of effects in nature, and are not
mere continuations of it; on the contrary, the determining causes of
nature cease to operate in reference to this event, which certainly
succeeds the acts of nature, but does not proceed from them. For these
reasons, the action of a free agent must be termed, in regard to
causality, if not in relation to time, an absolutely primal beginning
of a series of phenomena.

The justification of this need of reason to rest upon a free act as the
first beginning of the series of natural causes is evident from the
fact, that all philosophers of antiquity (with the exception of the
Epicurean school) felt themselves obliged, when constructing a theory
of the motions of the universe, to accept a prime mover, that is, a
freely acting cause, which spontaneously and prior to all other causes
evolved this series of states. They always felt the need of going
beyond mere nature, for the purpose of making a first beginning
comprehensible.

ON THE ANTITHESIS.

The assertor of the all-sufficiency of nature in regard to causality
(transcendental Physiocracy), in opposition to the doctrine of freedom,
would defend his view of the question somewhat in the following manner.
He would say, in answer to the sophistical arguments of the opposite
party: If you do not accept a mathematical first, in relation to time,
you have no need to seek a dynamical first, in regard to causality. Who
compelled you to imagine an absolutely primal condition of the world,
and therewith an absolute beginning of the gradually progressing
successions of phenomena—and, as some foundation for this fancy of
yours, to set bounds to unlimited nature? Inasmuch as the substances in
the world have always existed—at least the unity of experience renders
such a supposition quite necessary—there is no difficulty in believing
also, that the changes in the conditions of these substances have
always existed; and, consequently, that a first beginning, mathematical
or dynamical, is by no means required. The possibility of such an
infinite derivation, without any initial member from which all the
others result, is certainly quite incomprehensible. But, if you are
rash enough to deny the enigmatical secrets of nature for this reason,
you will find yourselves obliged to deny also the existence of many
fundamental properties of natural objects (such as fundamental forces),
which you can just as little comprehend; and even the possibility of so
simple a conception as that of change must present to you insuperable
difficulties. For if experience did not teach you that it was real, you
never could conceive à priori the possibility of this ceaseless
sequence of being and non-being.

But if the existence of a transcendental faculty of freedom is
granted—a faculty of originating changes in the world—this faculty must
at least exist out of and apart from the world; although it is
certainly a bold assumption, that, over and above the complete content
of all possible intuitions, there still exists an object which cannot
be presented in any possible perception. But, to attribute to
substances in the world itself such a faculty, is quite inadmissible;
for, in this case; the connection of phenomena reciprocally determining
and determined according to general laws, which is termed nature, and
along with it the criteria of empirical truth, which enable us to
distinguish experience from mere visionary dreaming, would almost
entirely disappear. In proximity with such a lawless faculty of
freedom, a system of nature is hardly cogitable; for the laws of the
latter would be continually subject to the intrusive influences of the
former, and the course of phenomena, which would otherwise proceed
regularly and uniformly, would become thereby confused and
disconnected.

FOURTH CONFLICT OF THE TRANSCENDENTAL IDEAS. THESIS.

There exists either in, or in connection with the world—either as a
part of it, or as the cause of it—an absolutely necessary being.

PROOF.

The world of sense, as the sum total of all phenomena, contains a
series of changes. For, without such a series, the mental
representation of the series of time itself, as the condition of the
possibility of the sensuous world, could not be presented to us.[55]
But every change stands under its condition, which precedes it in time
and renders it necessary. Now the existence of a given condition
presupposes a complete series of conditions up to the absolutely
unconditioned, which alone is absolutely necessary. It follows that
something that is absolutely necessary must exist, if change exists as
its consequence. But this necessary thing itself belongs to the
sensuous world. For suppose it to exist out of and apart from it, the
series of cosmical changes would receive from it a beginning, and yet
this necessary cause would not itself belong to the world of sense. But
this is impossible. For, as the beginning of a series in time is
determined only by that which precedes it in time, the supreme
condition of the beginning of a series of changes must exist in the
time in which this series itself did not exist; for a beginning
supposes a time preceding, in which the thing that begins to be was not
in existence. The causality of the necessary cause of changes, and
consequently the cause itself, must for these reasons belong to
time—and to phenomena, time being possible only as the form of
phenomena. Consequently, it cannot be cogitated as separated from the
world of sense—the sum total of all phenomena. There is, therefore,
contained in the world, something that is absolutely necessary—whether
it be the whole cosmical series itself, or only a part of it.

 [55] Objectively, time, as the formal condition of the possibility of
 change, precedes all changes; but subjectively, and in consciousness,
 the representation of time, like every other, is given solely by
 occasion of perception.

ANTITHESIS.

An absolutely necessary being does not exist, either in the world, or
out of it—as its cause.

PROOF.

Grant that either the world itself is necessary, or that there is
contained in it a necessary existence. Two cases are possible. First,
there must either be in the series of cosmical changes a beginning,
which is unconditionally necessary, and therefore uncaused—which is at
variance with the dynamical law of the determination of all phenomena
in time; or, secondly, the series itself is without beginning, and,
although contingent and conditioned in all its parts, is nevertheless
absolutely necessary and unconditioned as a whole—which is
self-contradictory. For the existence of an aggregate cannot be
necessary, if no single part of it possesses necessary existence.

Grant, on the other hand, that an absolutely necessary cause exists out
of and apart from the world. This cause, as the highest member in the
series of the causes of cosmical changes, must originate or begin[56]
the existence of the latter and their series. In this case it must also
begin to act, and its causality would therefore belong to time, and
consequently to the sum total of phenomena, that is, to the world. It
follows that the cause cannot be out of the world; which is
contradictory to the hypothesis. Therefore, neither in the world, nor
out of it (but in causal connection with it), does there exist any
absolutely necessary being.

 [56] The word begin is taken in two senses. The first is active—the
 cause being regarded as beginning a series of conditions as its effect
 (infit). The second is passive—the causality in the cause itself
 beginning to operate (fit). I reason here from the first to the
 second.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE FOURTH ANTINOMY. ON THE THESIS.

To demonstrate the existence of a necessary being, I cannot be
permitted in this place to employ any other than the cosmological
argument, which ascends from the conditioned in phenomena to the
unconditioned in conception—the unconditioned being considered the
necessary condition of the absolute totality of the series. The proof,
from the mere idea of a supreme being, belongs to another principle of
reason and requires separate discussion.

The pure cosmological proof demonstrates the existence of a necessary
being, but at the same time leaves it quite unsettled, whether this
being is the world itself, or quite distinct from it. To establish the
truth of the latter view, principles are requisite, which are not
cosmological and do not proceed in the series of phenomena. We should
require to introduce into our proof conceptions of contingent
beings—regarded merely as objects of the understanding, and also a
principle which enables us to connect these, by means of mere
conceptions, with a necessary being. But the proper place for all such
arguments is a transcendent philosophy, which has unhappily not yet
been established.

But, if we begin our proof cosmologically, by laying at the foundation
of it the series of phenomena, and the regress in it according to
empirical laws of causality, we are not at liberty to break off from
this mode of demonstration and to pass over to something which is not
itself a member of the series. The condition must be taken in exactly
the same signification as the relation of the conditioned to its
condition in the series has been taken, for the series must conduct us
in an unbroken regress to this supreme condition. But if this relation
is sensuous, and belongs to the possible empirical employment of
understanding, the supreme condition or cause must close the regressive
series according to the laws of sensibility and consequently, must
belong to the series of time. It follows that this necessary existence
must be regarded as the highest member of the cosmical series.

Certain philosophers have, nevertheless, allowed themselves the liberty
of making such a saltus (metabasis eis allo gonos). From the changes in
the world they have concluded their empirical contingency, that is,
their dependence on empirically-determined causes, and they thus
admitted an ascending series of empirical conditions: and in this they
are quite right. But as they could not find in this series any primal
beginning or any highest member, they passed suddenly from the
empirical conception of contingency to the pure category, which
presents us with a series—not sensuous, but intellectual—whose
completeness does certainly rest upon the existence of an absolutely
necessary cause. Nay, more, this intellectual series is not tied to any
sensuous conditions; and is therefore free from the condition of time,
which requires it spontaneously to begin its causality in time. But
such a procedure is perfectly inadmissible, as will be made plain from
what follows.

In the pure sense of the categories, that is contingent the
contradictory opposite of which is possible. Now we cannot reason from
empirical contingency to intellectual. The opposite of that which is
changed—the opposite of its state—is actual at another time, and is
therefore possible. Consequently, it is not the contradictory opposite
of the former state. To be that, it is necessary that, in the same time
in which the preceding state existed, its opposite could have existed
in its place; but such a cognition is not given us in the mere
phenomenon of change. A body that was in motion = A, comes into a state
of rest = non-A. Now it cannot be concluded from the fact that a state
opposite to the state A follows it, that the contradictory opposite of
A is possible; and that A is therefore contingent. To prove this, we
should require to know that the state of rest could have existed in the
very same time in which the motion took place. Now we know nothing more
than that the state of rest was actual in the time that followed the
state of motion; consequently, that it was also possible. But motion at
one time, and rest at another time, are not contradictorily opposed to
each other. It follows from what has been said that the succession of
opposite determinations, that is, change, does not demonstrate the fact
of contingency as represented in the conceptions of the pure
understanding; and that it cannot, therefore, conduct us to the fact of
the existence of a necessary being. Change proves merely empirical
contingency, that is to say, that the new state could not have existed
without a cause, which belongs to the preceding time. This cause—even
although it is regarded as absolutely necessary—must be presented to us
in time, and must belong to the series of phenomena.

ON THE ANTITHESIS.

The difficulties which meet us, in our attempt to rise through the
series of phenomena to the existence of an absolutely necessary supreme
cause, must not originate from our inability to establish the truth of
our mere conceptions of the necessary existence of a thing. That is to
say, our objections not be ontological, but must be directed against
the causal connection with a series of phenomena of a condition which
is itself unconditioned. In one word, they must be cosmological and
relate to empirical laws. We must show that the regress in the series
of causes (in the world of sense) cannot conclude with an empirically
unconditioned condition, and that the cosmological argument from the
contingency of the cosmical state—a contingency alleged to arise from
change—does not justify us in accepting a first cause, that is, a prime
originator of the cosmical series.

The reader will observe in this antinomy a very remarkable contrast.
The very same grounds of proof which established in the thesis the
existence of a supreme being, demonstrated in the antithesis—and with
equal strictness—the non-existence of such a being. We found, first,
that a necessary being exists, because the whole time past contains the
series of all conditions, and with it, therefore, the unconditioned
(the necessary); secondly, that there does not exist any necessary
being, for the same reason, that the whole time past contains the
series of all conditions—which are themselves, therefore, in the
aggregate, conditioned. The cause of this seeming incongruity is as
follows. We attend, in the first argument, solely to the absolute
totality of the series of conditions, the one of which determines the
other in time, and thus arrive at a necessary unconditioned. In the
second, we consider, on the contrary, the contingency of everything
that is determined in the series of time—for every event is preceded by
a time, in which the condition itself must be determined as
conditioned—and thus everything that is unconditioned or absolutely
necessary disappears. In both, the mode of proof is quite in accordance
with the common procedure of human reason, which often falls into
discord with itself, from considering an object from two different
points of view. Herr von Mairan regarded the controversy between two
celebrated astronomers, which arose from a similar difficulty as to the
choice of a proper standpoint, as a phenomenon of sufficient importance
to warrant a separate treatise on the subject. The one concluded: the
moon revolves on its own axis, because it constantly presents the same
side to the earth; the other declared that the moon does not revolve on
its own axis, for the same reason. Both conclusions were perfectly
correct, according to the point of view from which the motions of the
moon were considered.

Section III. Of the Interest of Reason in these Self-contradictions

We have thus completely before us the dialectical procedure of the
cosmological ideas. No possible experience can present us with an
object adequate to them in extent. Nay, more, reason itself cannot
cogitate them as according with the general laws of experience. And yet
they are not arbitrary fictions of thought. On the contrary, reason, in
its uninterrupted progress in the empirical synthesis, is necessarily
conducted to them, when it endeavours to free from all conditions and
to comprehend in its unconditioned totality that which can only be
determined conditionally in accordance with the laws of experience.
These dialectical propositions are so many attempts to solve four
natural and unavoidable problems of reason. There are neither more, nor
can there be less, than this number, because there are no other series
of synthetical hypotheses, limiting à priori the empirical synthesis.

The brilliant claims of reason striving to extend its dominion beyond
the limits of experience, have been represented above only in dry
formulae, which contain merely the grounds of its pretensions. They
have, besides, in conformity with the character of a transcendental
philosophy, been freed from every empirical element; although the full
splendour of the promises they hold out, and the anticipations they
excite, manifests itself only when in connection with empirical
cognitions. In the application of them, however, and in the advancing
enlargement of the employment of reason, while struggling to rise from
the region of experience and to soar to those sublime ideas, philosophy
discovers a value and a dignity, which, if it could but make good its
assertions, would raise it far above all other departments of human
knowledge—professing, as it does, to present a sure foundation for our
highest hopes and the ultimate aims of all the exertions of reason. The
questions: whether the world has a beginning and a limit to its
extension in space; whether there exists anywhere, or perhaps, in my
own thinking Self, an indivisible and indestructible unity—or whether
nothing but what is divisible and transitory exists; whether I am a
free agent, or, like other beings, am bound in the chains of nature and
fate; whether, finally, there is a supreme cause of the world, or all
our thought and speculation must end with nature and the order of
external things—are questions for the solution of which the
mathematician would willingly exchange his whole science; for in it
there is no satisfaction for the highest aspirations and most ardent
desires of humanity. Nay, it may even be said that the true value of
mathematics—that pride of human reason—consists in this: that she
guides reason to the knowledge of nature—in her greater as well as in
her less manifestations—in her beautiful order and regularity—guides
her, moreover, to an insight into the wonderful unity of the moving
forces in the operations of nature, far beyond the expectations of a
philosophy building only on experience; and that she thus encourages
philosophy to extend the province of reason beyond all experience, and
at the same time provides it with the most excellent materials for
supporting its investigations, in so far as their nature admits, by
adequate and accordant intuitions.

Unfortunately for speculation—but perhaps fortunately for the practical
interests of humanity—reason, in the midst of her highest
anticipations, finds herself hemmed in by a press of opposite and
contradictory conclusions, from which neither her honour nor her safety
will permit her to draw back. Nor can she regard these conflicting
trains of reasoning with indifference as mere passages at arms, still
less can she command peace; for in the subject of the conflict she has
a deep interest. There is no other course left open to her than to
reflect with herself upon the origin of this disunion in reason—whether
it may not arise from a mere misunderstanding. After such an inquiry,
arrogant claims would have to be given up on both sides; but the
sovereignty of reason over understanding and sense would be based upon
a sure foundation.

We shall at present defer this radical inquiry and, in the meantime,
consider for a little what side in the controversy we should most
willingly take, if we were obliged to become partisans at all. As, in
this case, we leave out of sight altogether the logical criterion of
truth, and merely consult our own interest in reference to the
question, these considerations, although inadequate to settle the
question of right in either party, will enable us to comprehend how
those who have taken part in the struggle, adopt the one view rather
than the other—no special insight into the subject, however, having
influenced their choice. They will, at the same time, explain to us
many other things by the way—for example, the fiery zeal on the one
side and the cold maintenance of their cause on the other; why the one
party has met with the warmest approbations, and the other has always
been repulsed by irreconcilable prejudices.

There is one thing, however, that determines the proper point of view,
from which alone this preliminary inquiry can be instituted and carried
on with the proper completeness—and that is the comparison of the
principles from which both sides, thesis and antithesis, proceed. My
readers would remark in the propositions of the antithesis a complete
uniformity in the mode of thought and a perfect unity of principle. Its
principle was that of pure empiricism, not only in the explication of
the phenomena in the world, but also in the solution of the
transcendental ideas, even of that of the universe itself. The
affirmations of the thesis, on the contrary, were based, in addition to
the empirical mode of explanation employed in the series of phenomena,
on intellectual propositions; and its principles were in so far not
simple. I shall term the thesis, in view of its essential
characteristic, the dogmatism of pure reason.

On the side of Dogmatism, or of the thesis, therefore, in the
determination of the cosmological ideas, we find:

1. A practical interest, which must be very dear to every
right-thinking man. That the word has a beginning—that the nature of my
thinking self is simple, and therefore indestructible—that I am a free
agent, and raised above the compulsion of nature and her laws—and,
finally, that the entire order of things, which form the world, is
dependent upon a Supreme Being, from whom the whole receives unity and
connection—these are so many foundation-stones of morality and
religion. The antithesis deprives us of all these supports—or, at
least, seems so to deprive us.

2. A speculative interest of reason manifests itself on this side. For,
if we take the transcendental ideas and employ them in the manner which
the thesis directs, we can exhibit completely à priori the entire chain
of conditions, and understand the derivation of the
conditioned—beginning from the unconditioned. This the antithesis does
not do; and for this reason does not meet with so welcome a reception.
For it can give no answer to our question respecting the conditions of
its synthesis—except such as must be supplemented by another question,
and so on to infinity. According to it, we must rise from a given
beginning to one still higher; every part conducts us to a still
smaller one; every event is preceded by another event which is its
cause; and the conditions of existence rest always upon other and still
higher conditions, and find neither end nor basis in some
self-subsistent thing as the primal being.

3. This side has also the advantage of popularity; and this constitutes
no small part of its claim to favour. The common understanding does not
find the least difficulty in the idea of the unconditioned beginning of
all synthesis—accustomed, as it is, rather to follow our consequences
than to seek for a proper basis for cognition. In the conception of an
absolute first, moreover—the possibility of which it does not inquire
into—it is highly gratified to find a firmly-established point of
departure for its attempts at theory; while in the restless and
continuous ascent from the conditioned to the condition, always with
one foot in the air, it can find no satisfaction.

On the side of the antithesis, or Empiricism, in the determination of
the cosmological ideas:

1. We cannot discover any such practical interest arising from pure
principles of reason as morality and religion present. On the contrary,
pure empiricism seems to empty them of all their power and influence.
If there does not exist a Supreme Being distinct from the world—if the
world is without beginning, consequently without a Creator—if our wills
are not free, and the soul is divisible and subject to corruption just
like matter—the ideas and principles of morality lose all validity and
fall with the transcendental ideas which constituted their theoretical
support.

2. But empiricism, in compensation, holds out to reason, in its
speculative interests, certain important advantages, far exceeding any
that the dogmatist can promise us. For, when employed by the
empiricist, understanding is always upon its proper ground of
investigation—the field of possible experience, the laws of which it
can explore, and thus extend its cognition securely and with clear
intelligence without being stopped by limits in any direction. Here can
it and ought it to find and present to intuition its proper object—not
only in itself, but in all its relations; or, if it employ conceptions,
upon this ground it can always present the corresponding images in
clear and unmistakable intuitions. It is quite unnecessary for it to
renounce the guidance of nature, to attach itself to ideas, the objects
of which it cannot know; because, as mere intellectual entities, they
cannot be presented in any intuition. On the contrary, it is not even
permitted to abandon its proper occupation, under the pretence that it
has been brought to a conclusion (for it never can be), and to pass
into the region of idealizing reason and transcendent conceptions,
which it is not required to observe and explore the laws of nature, but
merely to think and to imagine—secure from being contradicted by facts,
because they have not been called as witnesses, but passed by, or
perhaps subordinated to the so-called higher interests and
considerations of pure reason.

Hence the empiricist will never allow himself to accept any epoch of
nature for the first—the absolutely primal state; he will not believe
that there can be limits to his outlook into her wide domains, nor pass
from the objects of nature, which he can satisfactorily explain by
means of observation and mathematical thought—which he can determine
synthetically in intuition, to those which neither sense nor
imagination can ever present in concreto; he will not concede the
existence of a faculty in nature, operating independently of the laws
of nature—a concession which would introduce uncertainty into the
procedure of the understanding, which is guided by necessary laws to
the observation of phenomena; nor, finally, will he permit himself to
seek a cause beyond nature, inasmuch as we know nothing but it, and
from it alone receive an objective basis for all our conceptions and
instruction in the unvarying laws of things.

In truth, if the empirical philosopher had no other purpose in the
establishment of his antithesis than to check the presumption of a
reason which mistakes its true destination, which boasts of its insight
and its knowledge, just where all insight and knowledge cease to exist,
and regards that which is valid only in relation to a practical
interest, as an advancement of the speculative interests of the mind
(in order, when it is convenient for itself, to break the thread of our
physical investigations, and, under pretence of extending our
cognition, connect them with transcendental ideas, by means of which we
really know only that we know nothing)—if, I say, the empiricist rested
satisfied with this benefit, the principle advanced by him would be a
maxim recommending moderation in the pretensions of reason and modesty
in its affirmations, and at the same time would direct us to the right
mode of extending the province of the understanding, by the help of the
only true teacher, experience. In obedience to this advice,
intellectual hypotheses and faith would not be called in aid of our
practical interests; nor should we introduce them under the pompous
titles of science and insight. For speculative cognition cannot find an
objective basis any other where than in experience; and, when we
overstep its limits our synthesis, which requires ever new cognitions
independent of experience, has no substratum of intuition upon which to
build.

But if—as often happens—empiricism, in relation to ideas, becomes
itself dogmatic and boldly denies that which is above the sphere of its
phenomenal cognition, it falls itself into the error of intemperance—an
error which is here all the more reprehensible, as thereby the
practical interest of reason receives an irreparable injury.

And this constitutes the opposition between Epicureanism[57] and
Platonism.

 [57] It is, however, still a matter of doubt whether Epicurus ever
 propounded these principles as directions for the objective employment
 of the understanding. If, indeed, they were nothing more than maxims
 for the speculative exercise of reason, he gives evidence therein a
 more genuine philosophic spirit than any of the philosophers of
 antiquity. That, in the explanation of phenomena, we must proceed as
 if the field of inquiry had neither limits in space nor commencement
 in time; that we must be satisfied with the teaching of experience in
 reference to the material of which the world is posed; that we must
 not look for any other mode of the origination of events than that
 which is determined by the unalterable laws of nature; and finally,
 that we not employ the hypothesis of a cause distinct from the world
 to account for a phenomenon or for the world itself—are principles for
 the extension of speculative philosophy, and the discovery of the true
 sources of the principles of morals, which, however little conformed
 to in the present day, are undoubtedly correct. At the same time, any
 one desirous of ignoring, in mere speculation, these dogmatical
 propositions, need not for that reason be accused of denying them.

Both Epicurus and Plato assert more in their systems than they know.
The former encourages and advances science—although to the prejudice of
the practical; the latter presents us with excellent principles for the
investigation of the practical, but, in relation to everything
regarding which we can attain to speculative cognition, permits reason
to append idealistic explanations of natural phenomena, to the great
injury of physical investigation.

3. In regard to the third motive for the preliminary choice of a party
in this war of assertions, it seems very extraordinary that empiricism
should be utterly unpopular. We should be inclined to believe that the
common understanding would receive it with pleasure—promising as it
does to satisfy it without passing the bounds of experience and its
connected order; while transcendental dogmatism obliges it to rise to
conceptions which far surpass the intelligence and ability of the most
practised thinkers. But in this, in truth, is to be found its real
motive. For the common understanding thus finds itself in a situation
where not even the most learned can have the advantage of it. If it
understands little or nothing about these transcendental conceptions,
no one can boast of understanding any more; and although it may not
express itself in so scholastically correct a manner as others, it can
busy itself with reasoning and arguments without end, wandering among
mere ideas, about which one can always be very eloquent, because we
know nothing about them; while, in the observation and investigation of
nature, it would be forced to remain dumb and to confess its utter
ignorance. Thus indolence and vanity form of themselves strong
recommendations of these principles. Besides, although it is a hard
thing for a philosopher to assume a principle, of which he can give to
himself no reasonable account, and still more to employ conceptions,
the objective reality of which cannot be established, nothing is more
usual with the common understanding. It wants something which will
allow it to go to work with confidence. The difficulty of even
comprehending a supposition does not disquiet it, because—not knowing
what comprehending means—it never even thinks of the supposition it may
be adopting as a principle; and regards as known that with which it has
become familiar from constant use. And, at last, all speculative
interests disappear before the practical interests which it holds dear;
and it fancies that it understands and knows what its necessities and
hopes incite it to assume or to believe. Thus the empiricism of
transcendentally idealizing reason is robbed of all popularity; and,
however prejudicial it may be to the highest practical principles,
there is no fear that it will ever pass the limits of the schools, or
acquire any favour or influence in society or with the multitude.

Human reason is by nature architectonic. That is to say, it regards all
cognitions as parts of a possible system, and hence accepts only such
principles as at least do not incapacitate a cognition to which we may
have attained from being placed along with others in a general system.
But the propositions of the antithesis are of a character which renders
the completion of an edifice of cognitions impossible. According to
these, beyond one state or epoch of the world there is always to be
found one more ancient; in every part always other parts themselves
divisible; preceding every event another, the origin of which must
itself be sought still higher; and everything in existence is
conditioned, and still not dependent on an unconditioned and primal
existence. As, therefore, the antithesis will not concede the existence
of a first beginning which might be available as a foundation, a
complete edifice of cognition, in the presence of such hypothesis, is
utterly impossible. Thus the architectonic interest of reason, which
requires a unity—not empirical, but à priori and rational—forms a
natural recommendation for the assertions of the thesis in our
antinomy.

But if any one could free himself entirely from all considerations of
interest, and weigh without partiality the assertions of reason,
attending only to their content, irrespective of the consequences which
follow from them; such a person, on the supposition that he knew no
other way out of the confusion than to settle the truth of one or other
of the conflicting doctrines, would live in a state of continual
hesitation. Today, he would feel convinced that the human will is free;
to-morrow, considering the indissoluble chain of nature, he would look
on freedom as a mere illusion and declare nature to be all-in-all. But,
if he were called to action, the play of the merely speculative reason
would disappear like the shapes of a dream, and practical interest
would dictate his choice of principles. But, as it well befits a
reflective and inquiring being to devote certain periods of time to the
examination of its own reason—to divest itself of all partiality, and
frankly to communicate its observations for the judgement and opinion
of others; so no one can be blamed for, much less prevented from,
placing both parties on their trial, with permission to end themselves,
free from intimidation, before intimidation, before a sworn jury of
equal condition with themselves—the condition of weak and fallible men.

Section IV. Of the necessity imposed upon Pure Reason of presenting a
Solution of its Transcendental Problems

To avow an ability to solve all problems and to answer all questions
would be a profession certain to convict any philosopher of extravagant
boasting and self-conceit, and at once to destroy the confidence that
might otherwise have been reposed in him. There are, however, sciences
so constituted that every question arising within their sphere must
necessarily be capable of receiving an answer from the knowledge
already possessed, for the answer must be received from the same
sources whence the question arose. In such sciences it is not allowable
to excuse ourselves on the plea of necessary and unavoidable ignorance;
a solution is absolutely requisite. The rule of right and wrong must
help us to the knowledge of what is right or wrong in all possible
cases; otherwise, the idea of obligation or duty would be utterly null,
for we cannot have any obligation to that which we cannot know. On the
other hand, in our investigations of the phenomena of nature, much must
remain uncertain, and many questions continue insoluble; because what
we know of nature is far from being sufficient to explain all the
phenomena that are presented to our observation. Now the question is:
Whether there is in transcendental philosophy any question, relating to
an object presented to pure reason, which is unanswerable by this
reason; and whether we must regard the subject of the question as quite
uncertain, so far as our knowledge extends, and must give it a place
among those subjects, of which we have just so much conception as is
sufficient to enable us to raise a question—faculty or materials
failing us, however, when we attempt an answer.

Now I maintain that, among all speculative cognition, the peculiarity
of transcendental philosophy is that there is no question, relating to
an object presented to pure reason, which is insoluble by this reason;
and that the profession of unavoidable ignorance—the problem being
alleged to be beyond the reach of our faculties—cannot free us from the
obligation to present a complete and satisfactory answer. For the very
conception which enables us to raise the question must give us the
power of answering it; inasmuch as the object, as in the case of right
and wrong, is not to be discovered out of the conception.

But, in transcendental philosophy, it is only the cosmological
questions to which we can demand a satisfactory answer in relation to
the constitution of their object; and the philosopher is not permitted
to avail himself of the pretext of necessary ignorance and impenetrable
obscurity. These questions relate solely to the cosmological ideas. For
the object must be given in experience, and the question relates to the
adequateness of the object to an idea. If the object is transcendental
and therefore itself unknown; if the question, for example, is whether
the object—the something, the phenomenon of which (internal—in
ourselves) is thought—that is to say, the soul, is in itself a simple
being; or whether there is a cause of all things, which is absolutely
necessary—in such cases we are seeking for our idea an object, of which
we may confess that it is unknown to us, though we must not on that
account assert that it is impossible.[58] The cosmological ideas alone
posses the peculiarity that we can presuppose the object of them and
the empirical synthesis requisite for the conception of that object to
be given; and the question, which arises from these ideas, relates
merely to the progress of this synthesis, in so far as it must contain
absolute totality—which, however, is not empirical, as it cannot be
given in any experience. Now, as the question here is solely in regard
to a thing as the object of a possible experience and not as a thing in
itself, the answer to the transcendental cosmological question need not
be sought out of the idea, for the question does not regard an object
in itself. The question in relation to a possible experience is not,
“What can be given in an experience in concreto” but “what is contained
in the idea, to which the empirical synthesis must approximate.” The
question must therefore be capable of solution from the idea alone. For
the idea is a creation of reason itself, which therefore cannot
disclaim the obligation to answer or refer us to the unknown object.

 [58] The question, “What is the constitution of a transcendental
 object?” is unanswerable—we are unable to say what it is; but we can
 perceive that the question itself is nothing; because it does not
 relate to any object that can be presented to us. For this reason, we
 must consider all the questions raised in transcendental psychology as
 answerable and as really answered; for they relate to the
 transcendental subject of all internal phenomena, which is not itself
 phenomenon and consequently not given as an object, in which,
 moreover, none of the categories—and it is to them that the question
 is properly directed—find any conditions of its application. Here,
 therefore, is a case where no answer is the only proper answer. For a
 question regarding the constitution of a something which cannot be
 cogitated by any determined predicate, being completely beyond the
 sphere of objects and experience, is perfectly null and void.

It is not so extraordinary, as it at first sight appears, that a
science should demand and expect satisfactory answers to all the
questions that may arise within its own sphere (questiones domesticae),
although, up to a certain time, these answers may not have been
discovered. There are, in addition to transcendental philosophy, only
two pure sciences of reason; the one with a speculative, the other with
a practical content—pure mathematics and pure ethics. Has any one ever
heard it alleged that, from our complete and necessary ignorance of the
conditions, it is uncertain what exact relation the diameter of a
circle bears to the circle in rational or irrational numbers? By the
former the sum cannot be given exactly, by the latter only
approximately; and therefore we decide that the impossibility of a
solution of the question is evident. Lambert presented us with a
demonstration of this. In the general principles of morals there can be
nothing uncertain, for the propositions are either utterly without
meaning, or must originate solely in our rational conceptions. On the
other hand, there must be in physical science an infinite number of
conjectures, which can never become certainties; because the phenomena
of nature are not given as objects dependent on our conceptions. The
key to the solution of such questions cannot, therefore, be found in
our conceptions, or in pure thought, but must lie without us and for
that reason is in many cases not to be discovered; and consequently a
satisfactory explanation cannot be expected. The questions of
transcendental analytic, which relate to the deduction of our pure
cognition, are not to be regarded as of the same kind as those
mentioned above; for we are not at present treating of the certainty of
judgements in relation to the origin of our conceptions, but only of
that certainty in relation to objects.

We cannot, therefore, escape the responsibility of at least a critical
solution of the questions of reason, by complaints of the limited
nature of our faculties, and the seemingly humble confession that it is
beyond the power of our reason to decide, whether the world has existed
from all eternity or had a beginning—whether it is infinitely extended,
or enclosed within certain limits—whether anything in the world is
simple, or whether everything must be capable of infinite
divisibility—whether freedom can originate phenomena, or whether
everything is absolutely dependent on the laws and order of nature—and,
finally, whether there exists a being that is completely unconditioned
and necessary, or whether the existence of everything is conditioned
and consequently dependent on something external to itself, and
therefore in its own nature contingent. For all these questions relate
to an object, which can be given nowhere else than in thought. This
object is the absolutely unconditioned totality of the synthesis of
phenomena. If the conceptions in our minds do not assist us to some
certain result in regard to these problems, we must not defend
ourselves on the plea that the object itself remains hidden from and
unknown to us. For no such thing or object can be given—it is not to be
found out of the idea in our minds. We must seek the cause of our
failure in our idea itself, which is an insoluble problem and in regard
to which we obstinately assume that there exists a real object
corresponding and adequate to it. A clear explanation of the dialectic
which lies in our conception, will very soon enable us to come to a
satisfactory decision in regard to such a question.

The pretext that we are unable to arrive at certainty in regard to
these problems may be met with this question, which requires at least a
plain answer: “From what source do the ideas originate, the solution of
which involves you in such difficulties? Are you seeking for an
explanation of certain phenomena; and do you expect these ideas to give
you the principles or the rules of this explanation?” Let it be
granted, that all nature was laid open before you; that nothing was hid
from your senses and your consciousness. Still, you could not cognize
in concreto the object of your ideas in any experience. For what is
demanded is not only this full and complete intuition, but also a
complete synthesis and the consciousness of its absolute totality; and
this is not possible by means of any empirical cognition. It follows
that your question—your idea—is by no means necessary for the
explanation of any phenomenon; and the idea cannot have been in any
sense given by the object itself. For such an object can never be
presented to us, because it cannot be given by any possible experience.
Whatever perceptions you may attain to, you are still surrounded by
conditions—in space, or in time—and you cannot discover anything
unconditioned; nor can you decide whether this unconditioned is to be
placed in an absolute beginning of the synthesis, or in an absolute
totality of the series without beginning. A whole, in the empirical
signification of the term, is always merely comparative. The absolute
whole of quantity (the universe), of division, of derivation, of the
condition of existence, with the question—whether it is to be produced
by finite or infinite synthesis, no possible experience can instruct us
concerning. You will not, for example, be able to explain the phenomena
of a body in the least degree better, whether you believe it to consist
of simple, or of composite parts; for a simple phenomenon—and just as
little an infinite series of composition—can never be presented to your
perception. Phenomena require and admit of explanation, only in so far
as the conditions of that explanation are given in perception; but the
sum total of that which is given in phenomena, considered as an
absolute whole, is itself a perception—and we cannot therefore seek for
explanations of this whole beyond itself, in other perceptions. The
explanation of this whole is the proper object of the transcendental
problems of pure reason.

Although, therefore, the solution of these problems is unattainable
through experience, we must not permit ourselves to say that it is
uncertain how the object of our inquiries is constituted. For the
object is in our own mind and cannot be discovered in experience; and
we have only to take care that our thoughts are consistent with each
other, and to avoid falling into the amphiboly of regarding our idea as
a representation of an object empirically given, and therefore to be
cognized according to the laws of experience. A dogmatical solution is
therefore not only unsatisfactory but impossible. The critical
solution, which may be a perfectly certain one, does not consider the
question objectively, but proceeds by inquiring into the basis of the
cognition upon which the question rests.

Section V. Sceptical Exposition of the Cosmological Problems presented
in the four Transcendental Ideas

We should be quite willing to desist from the demand of a dogmatical
answer to our questions, if we understood beforehand that, be the
answer what it may, it would only serve to increase our ignorance, to
throw us from one incomprehensibility into another, from one obscurity
into another still greater, and perhaps lead us into irreconcilable
contradictions. If a dogmatical affirmative or negative answer is
demanded, is it at all prudent to set aside the probable grounds of a
solution which lie before us and to take into consideration what
advantage we shall gain, if the answer is to favour the one side or the
other? If it happens that in both cases the answer is mere nonsense, we
have in this an irresistible summons to institute a critical
investigation of the question, for the purpose of discovering whether
it is based on a groundless presupposition and relates to an idea, the
falsity of which would be more easily exposed in its application and
consequences than in the mere representation of its content. This is
the great utility of the sceptical mode of treating the questions
addressed by pure reason to itself. By this method we easily rid
ourselves of the confusions of dogmatism, and establish in its place a
temperate criticism, which, as a genuine cathartic, will successfully
remove the presumptuous notions of philosophy and their consequence—the
vain pretension to universal science.

If, then, I could understand the nature of a cosmological idea and
perceive, before I entered on the discussion of the subject at all,
that, whatever side of the question regarding the unconditioned of the
regressive synthesis of phenomena it favoured—it must either be too
great or too small for every conception of the understanding—I would be
able to comprehend how the idea, which relates to an object of
experience—an experience which must be adequate to and in accordance
with a possible conception of the understanding—must be completely void
and without significance, inasmuch as its object is inadequate,
consider it as we may. And this is actually the case with all
cosmological conceptions, which, for the reason above mentioned,
involve reason, so long as it remains attached to them, in an
unavoidable antinomy. For suppose:

First, that the world has no beginning—in this case it is too large for
our conception; for this conception, which consists in a successive
regress, cannot overtake the whole eternity that has elapsed. Grant
that it has a beginning, it is then too small for the conception of the
understanding. For, as a beginning presupposes a time preceding, it
cannot be unconditioned; and the law of the empirical employment of the
understanding imposes the necessity of looking for a higher condition
of time; and the world is, therefore, evidently too small for this law.

The same is the case with the double answer to the question regarding
the extent, in space, of the world. For, if it is infinite and
unlimited, it must be too large for every possible empirical
conception. If it is finite and limited, we have a right to ask: “What
determines these limits?” Void space is not a self-subsistent correlate
of things, and cannot be a final condition—and still less an empirical
condition, forming a part of a possible experience. For how can we have
any experience or perception of an absolute void? But the absolute
totality of the empirical synthesis requires that the unconditioned be
an empirical conception. Consequently, a finite world is too small for
our conception.

Secondly, if every phenomenon (matter) in space consists of an infinite
number of parts, the regress of the division is always too great for
our conception; and if the division of space must cease with some
member of the division (the simple), it is too small for the idea of
the unconditioned. For the member at which we have discontinued our
division still admits a regress to many more parts contained in the
object.

Thirdly, suppose that every event in the world happens in accordance
with the laws of nature; the causality of a cause must itself be an
event and necessitates a regress to a still higher cause, and
consequently the unceasing prolongation of the series of conditions a
parte priori. Operative nature is therefore too large for every
conception we can form in the synthesis of cosmical events.

If we admit the existence of spontaneously produced events, that is, of
free agency, we are driven, in our search for sufficient reasons, on an
unavoidable law of nature and are compelled to appeal to the empirical
law of causality, and we find that any such totality of connection in
our synthesis is too small for our necessary empirical conception.

Fourthly, if we assume the existence of an absolutely necessary
being—whether it be the world or something in the world, or the cause
of the world—we must place it in a time at an infinite distance from
any given moment; for, otherwise, it must be dependent on some other
and higher existence. Such an existence is, in this case, too large for
our empirical conception, and unattainable by the continued regress of
any synthesis.

But if we believe that everything in the world—be it condition or
conditioned—is contingent; every given existence is too small for our
conception. For in this case we are compelled to seek for some other
existence upon which the former depends.

We have said that in all these cases the cosmological idea is either
too great or too small for the empirical regress in a synthesis, and
consequently for every possible conception of the understanding. Why
did we not express ourselves in a manner exactly the reverse of this
and, instead of accusing the cosmological idea of over stepping or of
falling short of its true aim, possible experience, say that, in the
first case, the empirical conception is always too small for the idea,
and in the second too great, and thus attach the blame of these
contradictions to the empirical regress? The reason is this. Possible
experience can alone give reality to our conceptions; without it a
conception is merely an idea, without truth or relation to an object.
Hence a possible empirical conception must be the standard by which we
are to judge whether an idea is anything more than an idea and fiction
of thought, or whether it relates to an object in the world. If we say
of a thing that in relation to some other thing it is too large or too
small, the former is considered as existing for the sake of the latter,
and requiring to be adapted to it. Among the trivial subjects of
discussion in the old schools of dialectics was this question: “If a
ball cannot pass through a hole, shall we say that the ball is too
large or the hole too small?” In this case it is indifferent what
expression we employ; for we do not know which exists for the sake of
the other. On the other hand, we cannot say: “The man is too long for
his coat”; but: “The coat is too short for the man.”

We are thus led to the well-founded suspicion that the cosmological
ideas, and all the conflicting sophistical assertions connected with
them, are based upon a false and fictitious conception of the mode in
which the object of these ideas is presented to us; and this suspicion
will probably direct us how to expose the illusion that has so long led
us astray from the truth.

Section VI. Transcendental Idealism as the Key to the Solution of Pure
Cosmological Dialectic

In the transcendental æsthetic we proved that everything intuited in
space and time, all objects of a possible experience, are nothing but
phenomena, that is, mere representations; and that these, as presented
to us—as extended bodies, or as series of changes—have no
self-subsistent existence apart from human thought. This doctrine I
call Transcendental Idealism.[59] The realist in the transcendental
sense regards these modifications of our sensibility, these mere
representations, as things subsisting in themselves.

 [59] I have elsewhere termed this theory formal idealism, to
 distinguish it from material idealism, which doubts or denies the
 existence of external things. To avoid ambiguity, it seems advisable
 in many cases to employ this term instead of that mentioned in the
 text.

It would be unjust to accuse us of holding the long-decried theory of
empirical idealism, which, while admitting the reality of space,
denies, or at least doubts, the existence of bodies extended in it, and
thus leaves us without a sufficient criterion of reality and illusion.
The supporters of this theory find no difficulty in admitting the
reality of the phenomena of the internal sense in time; nay, they go
the length of maintaining that this internal experience is of itself a
sufficient proof of the real existence of its object as a thing in
itself.

Transcendental idealism allows that the objects of external
intuition—as intuited in space, and all changes in time—as represented
by the internal sense, are real. For, as space is the form of that
intuition which we call external, and, without objects in space, no
empirical representation could be given us, we can and ought to regard
extended bodies in it as real. The case is the same with
representations in time. But time and space, with all phenomena
therein, are not in themselves things. They are nothing but
representations and cannot exist out of and apart from the mind. Nay,
the sensuous internal intuition of the mind (as the object of
consciousness), the determination of which is represented by the
succession of different states in time, is not the real, proper self,
as it exists in itself—not the transcendental subject—but only a
phenomenon, which is presented to the sensibility of this, to us,
unknown being. This internal phenomenon cannot be admitted to be a
self-subsisting thing; for its condition is time, and time cannot be
the condition of a thing in itself. But the empirical truth of
phenomena in space and time is guaranteed beyond the possibility of
doubt, and sufficiently distinguished from the illusion of dreams or
fancy—although both have a proper and thorough connection in an
experience according to empirical laws. The objects of experience then
are not things in themselves, but are given only in experience, and
have no existence apart from and independently of experience. That
there may be inhabitants in the moon, although no one has ever observed
them, must certainly be admitted; but this assertion means only, that
we may in the possible progress of experience discover them at some
future time. For that which stands in connection with a perception
according to the laws of the progress of experience is real. They are
therefore really existent, if they stand in empirical connection with
my actual or real consciousness, although they are not in themselves
real, that is, apart from the progress of experience.

There is nothing actually given—we can be conscious of nothing as real,
except a perception and the empirical progression from it to other
possible perceptions. For phenomena, as mere representations, are real
only in perception; and perception is, in fact, nothing but the reality
of an empirical representation, that is, a phenomenon. To call a
phenomenon a real thing prior to perception means either that we must
meet with this phenomenon in the progress of experience, or it means
nothing at all. For I can say only of a thing in itself that it exists
without relation to the senses and experience. But we are speaking here
merely of phenomena in space and time, both of which are determinations
of sensibility, and not of things in themselves. It follows that
phenomena are not things in themselves, but are mere representations,
which if not given in us—in perception—are non-existent.

The faculty of sensuous intuition is properly a receptivity—a capacity
of being affected in a certain manner by representations, the relation
of which to each other is a pure intuition of space and time—the pure
forms of sensibility. These representations, in so far as they are
connected and determinable in this relation (in space and time)
according to laws of the unity of experience, are called objects. The
non-sensuous cause of these representations is completely unknown to us
and hence cannot be intuited as an object. For such an object could not
be represented either in space or in time; and without these conditions
intuition or representation is impossible. We may, at the same time,
term the non-sensuous cause of phenomena the transcendental object—but
merely as a mental correlate to sensibility, considered as a
receptivity. To this transcendental object we may attribute the whole
connection and extent of our possible perceptions, and say that it is
given and exists in itself prior to all experience. But the phenomena,
corresponding to it, are not given as things in themselves, but in
experience alone. For they are mere representations, receiving from
perceptions alone significance and relation to a real object, under the
condition that this or that perception—indicating an object—is in
complete connection with all others in accordance with the rules of the
unity of experience. Thus we can say: “The things that really existed
in past time are given in the transcendental object of experience.” But
these are to me real objects, only in so far as I can represent to my
own mind, that a regressive series of possible perceptions—following
the indications of history, or the footsteps of cause and effect—in
accordance with empirical laws—that, in one word, the course of the
world conducts us to an elapsed series of time as the condition of the
present time. This series in past time is represented as real, not in
itself, but only in connection with a possible experience. Thus, when I
say that certain events occurred in past time, I merely assert the
possibility of prolonging the chain of experience, from the present
perception, upwards to the conditions that determine it according to
time.

If I represent to myself all objects existing in all space and time, I
do not thereby place these in space and time prior to all experience;
on the contrary, such a representation is nothing more than the notion
of a possible experience, in its absolute completeness. In experience
alone are those objects, which are nothing but representations, given.
But, when I say they existed prior to my experience, this means only
that I must begin with the perception present to me and follow the
track indicated until I discover them in some part or region of
experience. The cause of the empirical condition of this
progression—and consequently at what member therein I must stop, and at
what point in the regress I am to find this member—is transcendental,
and hence necessarily incognizable. But with this we have not to do;
our concern is only with the law of progression in experience, in which
objects, that is, phenomena, are given. It is a matter of indifference,
whether I say, “I may in the progress of experience discover stars, at
a hundred times greater distance than the most distant of those now
visible,” or, “Stars at this distance may be met in space, although no
one has, or ever will discover them.” For, if they are given as things
in themselves, without any relation to possible experience, they are
for me non-existent, consequently, are not objects, for they are not
contained in the regressive series of experience. But, if these
phenomena must be employed in the construction or support of the
cosmological idea of an absolute whole, and when we are discussing a
question that oversteps the limits of possible experience, the proper
distinction of the different theories of the reality of sensuous
objects is of great importance, in order to avoid the illusion which
must necessarily arise from the misinterpretation of our empirical
conceptions.

Section VII. Critical Solution of the Cosmological Problem

The antinomy of pure reason is based upon the following dialectical
argument: “If that which is conditioned is given, the whole series of
its conditions is also given; but sensuous objects are given as
conditioned; consequently...” This syllogism, the major of which seems
so natural and evident, introduces as many cosmological ideas as there
are different kinds of conditions in the synthesis of phenomena, in so
far as these conditions constitute a series. These ideas require
absolute totality in the series, and thus place reason in inextricable
embarrassment. Before proceeding to expose the fallacy in this
dialectical argument, it will be necessary to have a correct
understanding of certain conceptions that appear in it.

In the first place, the following proposition is evident, and
indubitably certain: “If the conditioned is given, a regress in the
series of all its conditions is thereby imperatively required.” For the
very conception of a conditioned is a conception of something related
to a condition, and, if this condition is itself conditioned, to
another condition—and so on through all the members of the series. This
proposition is, therefore, analytical and has nothing to fear from
transcendental criticism. It is a logical postulate of reason: to
pursue, as far as possible, the connection of a conception with its
conditions.

If, in the second place, both the conditioned and the condition are
things in themselves, and if the former is given, not only is the
regress to the latter requisite, but the latter is really given with
the former. Now, as this is true of all the members of the series, the
entire series of conditions, and with them the unconditioned, is at the
same time given in the very fact of the conditioned, the existence of
which is possible only in and through that series, being given. In this
case, the synthesis of the conditioned with its condition, is a
synthesis of the understanding merely, which represents things as they
are, without regarding whether and how we can cognize them. But if I
have to do with phenomena, which, in their character of mere
representations, are not given, if I do not attain to a cognition of
them (in other words, to themselves, for they are nothing more than
empirical cognitions), I am not entitled to say: “If the conditioned is
given, all its conditions (as phenomena) are also given.” I cannot,
therefore, from the fact of a conditioned being given, infer the
absolute totality of the series of its conditions. For phenomena are
nothing but an empirical synthesis in apprehension or perception, and
are therefore given only in it. Now, in speaking of phenomena it does
not follow that, if the conditioned is given, the synthesis which
constitutes its empirical condition is also thereby given and
presupposed; such a synthesis can be established only by an actual
regress in the series of conditions. But we are entitled to say in this
case that a regress to the conditions of a conditioned, in other words,
that a continuous empirical synthesis is enjoined; that, if the
conditions are not given, they are at least required; and that we are
certain to discover the conditions in this regress.

We can now see that the major, in the above cosmological syllogism,
takes the conditioned in the transcendental signification which it has
in the pure category, while the minor speaks of it in the empirical
signification which it has in the category as applied to phenomena.
There is, therefore, a dialectical fallacy in the syllogism—a sophisma
figurae dictionis. But this fallacy is not a consciously devised one,
but a perfectly natural illusion of the common reason of man. For, when
a thing is given as conditioned, we presuppose in the major its
conditions and their series, unperceived, as it were, and unseen;
because this is nothing more than the logical requirement of complete
and satisfactory premisses for a given conclusion. In this case, time
is altogether left out in the connection of the conditioned with the
condition; they are supposed to be given in themselves, and
contemporaneously. It is, moreover, just as natural to regard phenomena
(in the minor) as things in themselves and as objects presented to the
pure understanding, as in the major, in which complete abstraction was
made of all conditions of intuition. But it is under these conditions
alone that objects are given. Now we overlooked a remarkable
distinction between the conceptions. The synthesis of the conditioned
with its condition, and the complete series of the latter (in the
major) are not limited by time, and do not contain the conception of
succession. On the contrary, the empirical synthesis and the series of
conditions in the phenomenal world—subsumed in the minor—are
necessarily successive and given in time alone. It follows that I
cannot presuppose in the minor, as I did in the major, the absolute
totality of the synthesis and of the series therein represented; for in
the major all the members of the series are given as things in
themselves—without any limitations or conditions of time, while in the
minor they are possible only in and through a successive regress, which
cannot exist, except it be actually carried into execution in the world
of phenomena.

After this proof of the viciousness of the argument commonly employed
in maintaining cosmological assertions, both parties may now be justly
dismissed, as advancing claims without grounds or title. But the
process has not been ended by convincing them that one or both were in
the wrong and had maintained an assertion which was without valid
grounds of proof. Nothing seems to be clearer than that, if one
maintains: “The world has a beginning,” and another: “The world has no
beginning,” one of the two must be right. But it is likewise clear
that, if the evidence on both sides is equal, it is impossible to
discover on what side the truth lies; and the controversy continues,
although the parties have been recommended to peace before the tribunal
of reason. There remains, then, no other means of settling the question
than to convince the parties, who refute each other with such
conclusiveness and ability, that they are disputing about nothing, and
that a transcendental illusion has been mocking them with visions of
reality where there is none. The mode of adjusting a dispute which
cannot be decided upon its own merits, we shall now proceed to lay
before our readers.

Zeno of Elea, a subtle dialectician, was severely reprimanded by Plato
as a sophist, who, merely from the base motive of exhibiting his skill
in discussion, maintained and subverted the same proposition by
arguments as powerful and convincing on the one side as on the other.
He maintained, for example, that God (who was probably nothing more, in
his view, than the world) is neither finite nor infinite, neither in
motion nor in rest, neither similar nor dissimilar to any other thing.
It seemed to those philosophers who criticized his mode of discussion
that his purpose was to deny completely both of two self-contradictory
propositions—which is absurd. But I cannot believe that there is any
justice in this accusation. The first of these propositions I shall
presently consider in a more detailed manner. With regard to the
others, if by the word of God he understood merely the Universe, his
meaning must have been—that it cannot be permanently present in one
place—that is, at rest—nor be capable of changing its place—that is, of
moving—because all places are in the universe, and the universe itself
is, therefore, in no place. Again, if the universe contains in itself
everything that exists, it cannot be similar or dissimilar to any other
thing, because there is, in fact, no other thing with which it can be
compared. If two opposite judgements presuppose a contingent
impossible, or arbitrary condition, both—in spite of their opposition
(which is, however, not properly or really a contradiction)—fall away;
because the condition, which ensured the validity of both, has itself
disappeared.

If we say: “Everybody has either a good or a bad smell,” we have
omitted a third possible judgement—it has no smell at all; and thus
both conflicting statements may be false. If we say: “It is either
good-smelling or not good-smelling (vel suaveolens vel
non-suaveolens),” both judgements are contradictorily opposed; and the
contradictory opposite of the former judgement—some bodies are not
good-smelling—embraces also those bodies which have no smell at all. In
the preceding pair of opposed judgements (per disparata), the
contingent condition of the conception of body (smell) attached to both
conflicting statements, instead of having been omitted in the latter,
which is consequently not the contradictory opposite of the former.

If, accordingly, we say: “The world is either infinite in extension, or
it is not infinite (non est infinitus)”; and if the former proposition
is false, its contradictory opposite—the world is not infinite—must be
true. And thus I should deny the existence of an infinite, without,
however affirming the existence of a finite world. But if we construct
our proposition thus: “The world is either infinite or finite
(non-infinite),” both statements may be false. For, in this case, we
consider the world as per se determined in regard to quantity, and
while, in the one judgement, we deny its infinite and consequently,
perhaps, its independent existence; in the other, we append to the
world, regarded as a thing in itself, a certain determination—that of
finitude; and the latter may be false as well as the former, if the
world is not given as a thing in itself, and thus neither as finite nor
as infinite in quantity. This kind of opposition I may be allowed to
term dialectical; that of contradictories may be called analytical
opposition. Thus then, of two dialectically opposed judgements both may
be false, from the fact, that the one is not a mere contradictory of
the other, but actually enounces more than is requisite for a full and
complete contradiction.

When we regard the two propositions—“The world is infinite in
quantity,” and, “The world is finite in quantity,” as contradictory
opposites, we are assuming that the world—the complete series of
phenomena—is a thing in itself. For it remains as a permanent quantity,
whether I deny the infinite or the finite regress in the series of its
phenomena. But if we dismiss this assumption—this transcendental
illusion—and deny that it is a thing in itself, the contradictory
opposition is metamorphosed into a merely dialectical one; and the
world, as not existing in itself—independently of the regressive series
of my representations—exists in like manner neither as a whole which is
infinite nor as a whole which is finite in itself. The universe exists
for me only in the empirical regress of the series of phenomena and not
per se. If, then, it is always conditioned, it is never completely or
as a whole; and it is, therefore, not an unconditioned whole and does
not exist as such, either with an infinite, or with a finite quantity.

What we have here said of the first cosmological idea—that of the
absolute totality of quantity in phenomena—applies also to the others.
The series of conditions is discoverable only in the regressive
synthesis itself, and not in the phenomenon considered as a thing in
itself—given prior to all regress. Hence I am compelled to say: “The
aggregate of parts in a given phenomenon is in itself neither finite
nor infinite; and these parts are given only in the regressive
synthesis of decomposition—a synthesis which is never given in absolute
completeness, either as finite, or as infinite.” The same is the case
with the series of subordinated causes, or of the conditioned up to the
unconditioned and necessary existence, which can never be regarded as
in itself, and in its totality, either as finite or as infinite;
because, as a series of subordinate representations, it subsists only
in the dynamical regress and cannot be regarded as existing previously
to this regress, or as a self-subsistent series of things.

Thus the antinomy of pure reason in its cosmological ideas disappears.
For the above demonstration has established the fact that it is merely
the product of a dialectical and illusory opposition, which arises from
the application of the idea of absolute totality—admissible only as a
condition of things in themselves—to phenomena, which exist only in our
representations, and—when constituting a series—in a successive
regress. This antinomy of reason may, however, be really profitable to
our speculative interests, not in the way of contributing any
dogmatical addition, but as presenting to us another material support
in our critical investigations. For it furnishes us with an indirect
proof of the transcendental ideality of phenomena, if our minds were
not completely satisfied with the direct proof set forth in the
Trancendental Æsthetic. The proof would proceed in the following
dilemma. If the world is a whole existing in itself, it must be either
finite or infinite. But it is neither finite nor infinite—as has been
shown, on the one side, by the thesis, on the other, by the antithesis.
Therefore the world—the content of all phenomena—is not a whole
existing in itself. It follows that phenomena are nothing, apart from
our representations. And this is what we mean by transcendental
ideality.

This remark is of some importance. It enables us to see that the proofs
of the fourfold antinomy are not mere sophistries—are not fallacious,
but grounded on the nature of reason, and valid—under the supposition
that phenomena are things in themselves. The opposition of the
judgements which follow makes it evident that a fallacy lay in the
initial supposition, and thus helps us to discover the true
constitution of objects of sense. This transcendental dialectic does
not favour scepticism, although it presents us with a triumphant
demonstration of the advantages of the sceptical method, the great
utility of which is apparent in the antinomy, where the arguments of
reason were allowed to confront each other in undiminished force. And
although the result of these conflicts of reason is not what we
expected—although we have obtained no positive dogmatical addition to
metaphysical science—we have still reaped a great advantage in the
correction of our judgements on these subjects of thought.

Section VIII. Regulative Principle of Pure Reason in relation to the
Cosmological Ideas

The cosmological principle of totality could not give us any certain
knowledge in regard to the maximum in the series of conditions in the
world of sense, considered as a thing in itself. The actual regress in
the series is the only means of approaching this maximum. This
principle of pure reason, therefore, may still be considered as
valid—not as an axiom enabling us to cogitate totality in the object as
actual, but as a problem for the understanding, which requires it to
institute and to continue, in conformity with the idea of totality in
the mind, the regress in the series of the conditions of a given
conditioned. For in the world of sense, that is, in space and time,
every condition which we discover in our investigation of phenomena is
itself conditioned; because sensuous objects are not things in
themselves (in which case an absolutely unconditioned might be reached
in the progress of cognition), but are merely empirical representations
the conditions of which must always be found in intuition. The
principle of reason is therefore properly a mere rule—prescribing a
regress in the series of conditions for given phenomena, and
prohibiting any pause or rest on an absolutely unconditioned. It is,
therefore, not a principle of the possibility of experience or of the
empirical cognition of sensuous objects—consequently not a principle of
the understanding; for every experience is confined within certain
proper limits determined by the given intuition. Still less is it a
constitutive principle of reason authorizing us to extend our
conception of the sensuous world beyond all possible experience. It is
merely a principle for the enlargement and extension of experience as
far as is possible for human faculties. It forbids us to consider any
empirical limits as absolute. It is, hence, a principle of reason,
which, as a rule, dictates how we ought to proceed in our empirical
regress, but is unable to anticipate or indicate prior to the empirical
regress what is given in the object itself. I have termed it for this
reason a regulative principle of reason; while the principle of the
absolute totality of the series of conditions, as existing in itself
and given in the object, is a constitutive cosmological principle. This
distinction will at once demonstrate the falsehood of the constitutive
principle, and prevent us from attributing (by a transcendental
subreptio) objective reality to an idea, which is valid only as a rule.

In order to understand the proper meaning of this rule of pure reason,
we must notice first that it cannot tell us what the object is, but
only how the empirical regress is to be proceeded with in order to
attain to the complete conception of the object. If it gave us any
information in respect to the former statement, it would be a
constitutive principle—a principle impossible from the nature of pure
reason. It will not therefore enable us to establish any such
conclusions as: “The series of conditions for a given conditioned is in
itself finite,” or, “It is infinite.” For, in this case, we should be
cogitating in the mere idea of absolute totality, an object which is
not and cannot be given in experience; inasmuch as we should be
attributing a reality objective and independent of the empirical
synthesis, to a series of phenomena. This idea of reason cannot then be
regarded as valid—except as a rule for the regressive synthesis in the
series of conditions, according to which we must proceed from the
conditioned, through all intermediate and subordinate conditions, up to
the unconditioned; although this goal is unattained and unattainable.
For the absolutely unconditioned cannot be discovered in the sphere of
experience.

We now proceed to determine clearly our notion of a synthesis which can
never be complete. There are two terms commonly employed for this
purpose. These terms are regarded as expressions of different and
distinguishable notions, although the ground of the distinction has
never been clearly exposed. The term employed by the mathematicians is
progressus in infinitum. The philosophers prefer the expression
progressus in indefinitum. Without detaining the reader with an
examination of the reasons for such a distinction, or with remarks on
the right or wrong use of the terms, I shall endeavour clearly to
determine these conceptions, so far as is necessary for the purpose in
this Critique.

We may, with propriety, say of a straight line, that it may be produced
to infinity. In this case the distinction between a progressus in
infinitum and a progressus in indefinitum is a mere piece of subtlety.
For, although when we say, “Produce a straight line,” it is more
correct to say in indefinitum than in infinitum; because the former
means, “Produce it as far as you please,” the second, “You must not
cease to produce it”; the expression in infinitum is, when we are
speaking of the power to do it, perfectly correct, for we can always
make it longer if we please—on to infinity. And this remark holds good
in all cases, when we speak of a progressus, that is, an advancement
from the condition to the conditioned; this possible advancement always
proceeds to infinity. We may proceed from a given pair in the
descending line of generation from father to son, and cogitate a
never-ending line of descendants from it. For in such a case reason
does not demand absolute totality in the series, because it does not
presuppose it as a condition and as given (datum), but merely as
conditioned, and as capable of being given (dabile).

Very different is the case with the problem: “How far the regress,
which ascends from the given conditioned to the conditions, must
extend”; whether I can say: “It is a regress in infinitum,” or only “in
indefinitum”; and whether, for example, setting out from the human
beings at present alive in the world, I may ascend in the series of
their ancestors, in infinitum—or whether all that can be said is, that
so far as I have proceeded, I have discovered no empirical ground for
considering the series limited, so that I am justified, and indeed,
compelled to search for ancestors still further back, although I am not
obliged by the idea of reason to presuppose them.

My answer to this question is: “If the series is given in empirical
intuition as a whole, the regress in the series of its internal
conditions proceeds in infinitum; but, if only one member of the series
is given, from which the regress is to proceed to absolute totality,
the regress is possible only in indefinitum.” For example, the division
of a portion of matter given within certain limits—of a body, that
is—proceeds in infinitum. For, as the condition of this whole is its
part, and the condition of the part a part of the part, and so on, and
as in this regress of decomposition an unconditioned indivisible member
of the series of conditions is not to be found; there are no reasons or
grounds in experience for stopping in the division, but, on the
contrary, the more remote members of the division are actually and
empirically given prior to this division. That is to say, the division
proceeds to infinity. On the other hand, the series of ancestors of any
given human being is not given, in its absolute totality, in any
experience, and yet the regress proceeds from every genealogical member
of this series to one still higher, and does not meet with any
empirical limit presenting an absolutely unconditioned member of the
series. But as the members of such a series are not contained in the
empirical intuition of the whole, prior to the regress, this regress
does not proceed to infinity, but only in indefinitum, that is, we are
called upon to discover other and higher members, which are themselves
always conditioned.

In neither case—the regressus in infinitum, nor the regressus
in indefinitum, is the series of conditions to be considered as
actually infinite in the object itself. This might be true of things
in themselves, but it cannot be asserted of phenomena, which, as
conditions of each other, are only given in the empirical regress
itself. Hence, the question no longer is, “What is the quantity of
this series of conditions in itself—is it finite or infinite?” for
it is nothing in itself; but, “How is the empirical regress to be
commenced, and how far ought we to proceed with it?” And here a signal
distinction in the application of this rule becomes apparent. If the
whole is given empirically, it is possible to recede in the series of
its internal conditions to infinity. But if the whole is not given, and
can only be given by and through the empirical regress, I can only say:
“It is possible to infinity, to proceed to still higher conditions in
the series.” In the first case, I am justified in asserting that more
members are empirically given in the object than I attain to in the
regress (of decomposition). In the second case, I am justified only
in saying, that I can always proceed further in the regress, because
no member of the series is given as absolutely conditioned, and thus
a higher member is possible, and an inquiry with regard to it is
necessary. In the one case it is necessary to find other members of the
series, in the other it is necessary to inquire for others, inasmuch as
experience presents no absolute limitation of the regress. For, either
you do not possess a perception which absolutely limits your empirical
regress, and in this case the regress cannot be regarded as complete;
or, you do possess such a limitative perception, in which case it is
not a part of your series (for that which limits must be distinct from
that which is limited by it), and it is incumbent on you to continue
your regress up to this condition, and so on.

These remarks will be placed in their proper light by their application
in the following section.

Section IX. Of the Empirical Use of the Regulative Principle of Reason
with regard to the Cosmological Ideas

We have shown that no transcendental use can be made either of the
conceptions of reason or of understanding. We have shown, likewise,
that the demand of absolute totality in the series of conditions in the
world of sense arises from a transcendental employment of reason,
resting on the opinion that phenomena are to be regarded as things in
themselves. It follows that we are not required to answer the question
respecting the absolute quantity of a series—whether it is in itself
limited or unlimited. We are only called upon to determine how far we
must proceed in the empirical regress from condition to condition, in
order to discover, in conformity with the rule of reason, a full and
correct answer to the questions proposed by reason itself.

This principle of reason is hence valid only as a rule for the
extension of a possible experience—its invalidity as a principle
constitutive of phenomena in themselves having been sufficiently
demonstrated. And thus, too, the antinomial conflict of reason with
itself is completely put an end to; inasmuch as we have not only
presented a critical solution of the fallacy lurking in the opposite
statements of reason, but have shown the true meaning of the ideas
which gave rise to these statements. The dialectical principle of
reason has, therefore, been changed into a doctrinal principle. But in
fact, if this principle, in the subjective signification which we have
shown to be its only true sense, may be guaranteed as a principle of
the unceasing extension of the employment of our understanding, its
influence and value are just as great as if it were an axiom for the à
priori determination of objects. For such an axiom could not exert a
stronger influence on the extension and rectification of our knowledge,
otherwise than by procuring for the principles of the understanding the
most widely expanded employment in the field of experience.

I. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the Composition
of Phenomena in the Universe

Here, as well as in the case of the other cosmological problems, the
ground of the regulative principle of reason is the proposition that in
our empirical regress no experience of an absolute limit, and
consequently no experience of a condition, which is itself absolutely
unconditioned, is discoverable. And the truth of this proposition
itself rests upon the consideration that such an experience must
represent to us phenomena as limited by nothing or the mere void, on
which our continued regress by means of perception must abut—which is
impossible.

Now this proposition, which declares that every condition attained in
the empirical regress must itself be considered empirically
conditioned, contains the rule in terminis, which requires me, to
whatever extent I may have proceeded in the ascending series, always to
look for some higher member in the series—whether this member is to
become known to me through experience, or not.

Nothing further is necessary, then, for the solution of the first
cosmological problem, than to decide, whether, in the regress to the
unconditioned quantity of the universe (as regards space and time),
this never limited ascent ought to be called a regressus in infinitum
or indefinitum.

The general representation which we form in our minds of the series of
all past states or conditions of the world, or of all the things which
at present exist in it, is itself nothing more than a possible
empirical regress, which is cogitated—although in an undetermined
manner—in the mind, and which gives rise to the conception of a series
of conditions for a given object.[60] Now I have a conception of the
universe, but not an intuition—that is, not an intuition of it as a
whole. Thus I cannot infer the magnitude of the regress from the
quantity or magnitude of the world, and determine the former by means
of the latter; on the contrary, I must first of all form a conception
of the quantity or magnitude of the world from the magnitude of the
empirical regress. But of this regress I know nothing more than that I
ought to proceed from every given member of the series of conditions to
one still higher. But the quantity of the universe is not thereby
determined, and we cannot affirm that this regress proceeds in
infinitum. Such an affirmation would anticipate the members of the
series which have not yet been reached, and represent the number of
them as beyond the grasp of any empirical synthesis; it would
consequently determine the cosmical quantity prior to the regress
(although only in a negative manner)—which is impossible. For the world
is not given in its totality in any intuition: consequently, its
quantity cannot be given prior to the regress. It follows that we are
unable to make any declaration respecting the cosmical quantity in
itself—not even that the regress in it is a regress in infinitum; we
must only endeavour to attain to a conception of the quantity of the
universe, in conformity with the rule which determines the empirical
regress in it. But this rule merely requires us never to admit an
absolute limit to our series—how far soever we may have proceeded in
it, but always, on the contrary, to subordinate every phenomenon to
some other as its condition, and consequently to proceed to this higher
phenomenon. Such a regress is, therefore, the regressus in indefinitum,
which, as not determining a quantity in the object, is clearly
distinguishable from the regressus in infinitum.

 [60] The cosmical series can neither be greater nor smaller than the
 possible empirical regress, upon which its conception is based. And as
 this regress cannot be a determinate infinite regress, still less a
 determinate finite (absolutely limited), it is evident that we cannot
 regard the world as either finite or infinite, because the regress,
 which gives us the representation of the world, is neither finite nor
 infinite.

It follows from what we have said that we are not justified in
declaring the world to be infinite in space, or as regards past time.
For this conception of an infinite given quantity is empirical; but we
cannot apply the conception of an infinite quantity to the world as an
object of the senses. I cannot say, “The regress from a given
perception to everything limited either in space or time, proceeds in
infinitum,” for this presupposes an infinite cosmical quantity; neither
can I say, “It is finite,” for an absolute limit is likewise impossible
in experience. It follows that I am not entitled to make any assertion
at all respecting the whole object of experience—the world of sense; I
must limit my declarations to the rule according to which experience or
empirical knowledge is to be attained.

To the question, therefore, respecting the cosmical quantity, the first
and negative answer is: “The world has no beginning in time, and no
absolute limit in space.”

For, in the contrary case, it would be limited by a void time on the
one hand, and by a void space on the other. Now, since the world, as a
phenomenon, cannot be thus limited in itself for a phenomenon is not a
thing in itself; it must be possible for us to have a perception of
this limitation by a void time and a void space. But such a
perception—such an experience is impossible; because it has no content.
Consequently, an absolute cosmical limit is empirically, and therefore
absolutely, impossible.[61]

 [61] The reader will remark that the proof presented above is very
 different from the dogmatical demonstration given in the antithesis of
 the first antinomy. In that demonstration, it was taken for granted
 that the world is a thing in itself—given in its totality prior to all
 regress, and a determined position in space and time was denied to
 it—if it was not considered as occupying all time and all space. Hence
 our conclusion differed from that given above; for we inferred in the
 antithesis the actual infinity of the world.

From this follows the affirmative answer: “The regress in the series of
phenomena—as a determination of the cosmical quantity, proceeds in
indefinitum.” This is equivalent to saying: “The world of sense has no
absolute quantity, but the empirical regress (through which alone the
world of sense is presented to us on the side of its conditions) rests
upon a rule, which requires it to proceed from every member of the
series, as conditioned, to one still more remote (whether through
personal experience, or by means of history, or the chain of cause and
effect), and not to cease at any point in this extension of the
possible empirical employment of the understanding.” And this is the
proper and only use which reason can make of its principles.

The above rule does not prescribe an unceasing regress in one kind of
phenomena. It does not, for example, forbid us, in our ascent from an
individual human being through the line of his ancestors, to expect
that we shall discover at some point of the regress a primeval pair, or
to admit, in the series of heavenly bodies, a sun at the farthest
possible distance from some centre. All that it demands is a perpetual
progress from phenomena to phenomena, even although an actual
perception is not presented by them (as in the case of our perceptions
being so weak as that we are unable to become conscious of them), since
they, nevertheless, belong to possible experience.

Every beginning is in time, and all limits to extension are in space.
But space and time are in the world of sense. Consequently phenomena in
the world are conditionally limited, but the world itself is not
limited, either conditionally or unconditionally.

For this reason, and because neither the world nor the cosmical series
of conditions to a given conditioned can be completely given, our
conception of the cosmical quantity is given only in and through the
regress and not prior to it—in a collective intuition. But the regress
itself is really nothing more than the determining of the cosmical
quantity, and cannot therefore give us any determined conception of
it—still less a conception of a quantity which is, in relation to a
certain standard, infinite. The regress does not, therefore, proceed to
infinity (an infinity given), but only to an indefinite extent, for or
the of presenting to us a quantity—realized only in and through the
regress itself.

II. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the Division
of a Whole given in Intuition

When I divide a whole which is given in intuition, I proceed from a
conditioned to its conditions. The division of the parts of the whole
(subdivisio or decompositio) is a regress in the series of these
conditions. The absolute totality of this series would be actually
attained and given to the mind, if the regress could arrive at simple
parts. But if all the parts in a continuous decomposition are
themselves divisible, the division, that is to say, the regress,
proceeds from the conditioned to its conditions in infinitum; because
the conditions (the parts) are themselves contained in the conditioned,
and, as the latter is given in a limited intuition, the former are all
given along with it. This regress cannot, therefore, be called a
regressus in indefinitum, as happened in the case of the preceding
cosmological idea, the regress in which proceeded from the conditioned
to the conditions not given contemporaneously and along with it, but
discoverable only through the empirical regress. We are not, however,
entitled to affirm of a whole of this kind, which is divisible in
infinitum, that it consists of an infinite number of parts. For,
although all the parts are contained in the intuition of the whole, the
whole division is not contained therein. The division is contained only
in the progressing decomposition—in the regress itself, which is the
condition of the possibility and actuality of the series. Now, as this
regress is infinite, all the members (parts) to which it attains must
be contained in the given whole as an aggregate. But the complete
series of division is not contained therein. For this series, being
infinite in succession and always incomplete, cannot represent an
infinite number of members, and still less a composition of these
members into a whole.

To apply this remark to space. Every limited part of space presented to
intuition is a whole, the parts of which are always spaces—to whatever
extent subdivided. Every limited space is hence divisible to infinity.

Let us again apply the remark to an external phenomenon enclosed in
limits, that is, a body. The divisibility of a body rests upon the
divisibility of space, which is the condition of the possibility of the
body as an extended whole. A body is consequently divisible to
infinity, though it does not, for that reason, consist of an infinite
number of parts.

It certainly seems that, as a body must be cogitated as substance in
space, the law of divisibility would not be applicable to it as
substance. For we may and ought to grant, in the case of space, that
division or decomposition, to any extent, never can utterly annihilate
composition (that is to say, the smallest part of space must still
consist of spaces); otherwise space would entirely cease to exist—which
is impossible. But, the assertion on the other hand that when all
composition in matter is annihilated in thought, nothing remains, does
not seem to harmonize with the conception of substance, which must be
properly the subject of all composition and must remain, even after the
conjunction of its attributes in space—which constituted a body—is
annihilated in thought. But this is not the case with substance in the
phenomenal world, which is not a thing in itself cogitated by the pure
category. Phenomenal substance is not an absolute subject; it is merely
a permanent sensuous image, and nothing more than an intuition, in
which the unconditioned is not to be found.

But, although this rule of progress to infinity is legitimate and
applicable to the subdivision of a phenomenon, as a mere occupation or
filling of space, it is not applicable to a whole consisting of a
number of distinct parts and constituting a quantum discretum—that is
to say, an organized body. It cannot be admitted that every part in an
organized whole is itself organized, and that, in analysing it to
infinity, we must always meet with organized parts; although we may
allow that the parts of the matter which we decompose in infinitum, may
be organized. For the infinity of the division of a phenomenon in space
rests altogether on the fact that the divisibility of a phenomenon is
given only in and through this infinity, that is, an undetermined
number of parts is given, while the parts themselves are given and
determined only in and through the subdivision; in a word, the infinity
of the division necessarily presupposes that the whole is not already
divided in se. Hence our division determines a number of parts in the
whole—a number which extends just as far as the actual regress in the
division; while, on the other hand, the very notion of a body organized
to infinity represents the whole as already and in itself divided. We
expect, therefore, to find in it a determinate, but at the same time,
infinite, number of parts—which is self-contradictory. For we should
thus have a whole containing a series of members which could not be
completed in any regress—which is infinite, and at the same time
complete in an organized composite. Infinite divisibility is applicable
only to a quantum continuum, and is based entirely on the infinite
divisibility of space, But in a quantum discretum the multitude of
parts or units is always determined, and hence always equal to some
number. To what extent a body may be organized, experience alone can
inform us; and although, so far as our experience of this or that body
has extended, we may not have discovered any inorganic part, such parts
must exist in possible experience. But how far the transcendental
division of a phenomenon must extend, we cannot know from experience—it
is a question which experience cannot answer; it is answered only by
the principle of reason which forbids us to consider the empirical
regress, in the analysis of extended body, as ever absolutely complete.

Concluding Remark on the Solution of the Transcendental Mathematical
Ideas—and Introductory to the Solution of the Dynamical Ideas.

We presented the antinomy of pure reason in a tabular form, and we
endeavoured to show the ground of this self-contradiction on the part
of reason, and the only means of bringing it to a conclusion—namely, by
declaring both contradictory statements to be false. We represented in
these antinomies the conditions of phenomena as belonging to the
conditioned according to relations of space and time—which is the usual
supposition of the common understanding. In this respect, all
dialectical representations of totality, in the series of conditions to
a given conditioned, were perfectly homogeneous. The condition was
always a member of the series along with the conditioned, and thus the
homogeneity of the whole series was assured. In this case the regress
could never be cogitated as complete; or, if this was the case, a
member really conditioned was falsely regarded as a primal member,
consequently as unconditioned. In such an antinomy, therefore, we did
not consider the object, that is, the conditioned, but the series of
conditions belonging to the object, and the magnitude of that series.
And thus arose the difficulty—a difficulty not to be settled by any
decision regarding the claims of the two parties, but simply by cutting
the knot—by declaring the series proposed by reason to be either too
long or too short for the understanding, which could in neither case
make its conceptions adequate with the ideas.

But we have overlooked, up to this point, an essential difference
existing between the conceptions of the understanding which reason
endeavours to raise to the rank of ideas—two of these indicating a
mathematical, and two a dynamical synthesis of phenomena. Hitherto, it
was necessary to signalize this distinction; for, just as in our
general representation of all transcendental ideas, we considered them
under phenomenal conditions, so, in the two mathematical ideas, our
discussion is concerned solely with an object in the world of
phenomena. But as we are now about to proceed to the consideration of
the dynamical conceptions of the understanding, and their adequateness
with ideas, we must not lose sight of this distinction. We shall find
that it opens up to us an entirely new view of the conflict in which
reason is involved. For, while in the first two antinomies, both
parties were dismissed, on the ground of having advanced statements
based upon false hypothesis; in the present case the hope appears of
discovering a hypothesis which may be consistent with the demands of
reason, and, the judge completing the statement of the grounds of
claim, which both parties had left in an unsatisfactory state, the
question may be settled on its own merits, not by dismissing the
claimants, but by a comparison of the arguments on both sides. If we
consider merely their extension, and whether they are adequate with
ideas, the series of conditions may be regarded as all homogeneous. But
the conception of the understanding which lies at the basis of these
ideas, contains either a synthesis of the homogeneous (presupposed in
every quantity—in its composition as well as in its division) or of the
heterogeneous, which is the case in the dynamical synthesis of cause
and effect, as well as of the necessary and the contingent.

Thus it happens that in the mathematical series of phenomena no other
than a sensuous condition is admissible—a condition which is itself a
member of the series; while the dynamical series of sensuous conditions
admits a heterogeneous condition, which is not a member of the series,
but, as purely intelligible, lies out of and beyond it. And thus reason
is satisfied, and an unconditioned placed at the head of the series of
phenomena, without introducing confusion into or discontinuing it,
contrary to the principles of the understanding.

Now, from the fact that the dynamical ideas admit a condition of
phenomena which does not form a part of the series of phenomena, arises
a result which we should not have expected from an antinomy. In former
cases, the result was that both contradictory dialectical statements
were declared to be false. In the present case, we find the conditioned
in the dynamical series connected with an empirically unconditioned,
but non-sensuous condition; and thus satisfaction is done to the
understanding on the one hand and to the reason on the other.[62]
While, moreover, the dialectical arguments for unconditioned totality
in mere phenomena fall to the ground, both propositions of reason may
be shown to be true in their proper signification. This could not
happen in the case of the cosmological ideas which demanded a
mathematically unconditioned unity; for no condition could be placed at
the head of the series of phenomena, except one which was itself a
phenomenon and consequently a member of the series.

 [62] For the understanding cannot admit among phenomena a condition
 which is itself empirically unconditioned. But if it is possible to
 cogitate an intelligible condition—one which is not a member of the
 series of phenomena—for a conditioned phenomenon, without breaking the
 series of empirical conditions, such a condition may be admissible as
 empirically unconditioned, and the empirical regress continue regular,
 unceasing, and intact.

III. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the Deduction
of Cosmical Events from their Causes

There are only two modes of causality cogitable—the causality of nature
or of freedom. The first is the conjunction of a particular state with
another preceding it in the world of sense, the former following the
latter by virtue of a law. Now, as the causality of phenomena is
subject to conditions of time, and the preceding state, if it had
always existed, could not have produced an effect which would make its
first appearance at a particular time, the causality of a cause must
itself be an effect—must itself have begun to be, and therefore,
according to the principle of the understanding, itself requires a
cause.

We must understand, on the contrary, by the term freedom, in the
cosmological sense, a faculty of the spontaneous origination of a
state; the causality of which, therefore, is not subordinated to
another cause determining it in time. Freedom is in this sense a pure
transcendental idea, which, in the first place, contains no empirical
element; the object of which, in the second place, cannot be given or
determined in any experience, because it is a universal law of the very
possibility of experience, that everything which happens must have a
cause, that consequently the causality of a cause, being itself
something that has happened, must also have a cause. In this view of
the case, the whole field of experience, how far soever it may extend,
contains nothing that is not subject to the laws of nature. But, as we
cannot by this means attain to an absolute totality of conditions in
reference to the series of causes and effects, reason creates the idea
of a spontaneity, which can begin to act of itself, and without any
external cause determining it to action, according to the natural law
of causality.

It is especially remarkable that the practical conception of freedom is
based upon the transcendental idea, and that the question of the
possibility of the former is difficult only as it involves the
consideration of the truth of the latter. Freedom, in the practical
sense, is the independence of the will of coercion by sensuous
impulses. A will is sensuous, in so far as it is pathologically
affected (by sensuous impulses); it is termed animal (arbitrium
brutum), when it is pathologically necessitated. The human will is
certainly an arbitrium sensitivum, not brutum, but liberum; because
sensuousness does not necessitate its action, a faculty existing in man
of self-determination, independently of all sensuous coercion.

It is plain that, if all causality in the world of sense were
natural—and natural only—every event would be determined by another
according to necessary laws, and that, consequently, phenomena, in so
far as they determine the will, must necessitate every action as a
natural effect from themselves; and thus all practical freedom would
fall to the ground with the transcendental idea. For the latter
presupposes that although a certain thing has not happened, it ought to
have happened, and that, consequently, its phenomenal cause was not so
powerful and determinative as to exclude the causality of our will—a
causality capable of producing effects independently of and even in
opposition to the power of natural causes, and capable, consequently,
of spontaneously originating a series of events.

Here, too, we find it to be the case, as we generally found in the
self-contradictions and perplexities of a reason which strives to pass
the bounds of possible experience, that the problem is properly not
physiological, but transcendental. The question of the possibility of
freedom does indeed concern psychology; but, as it rests upon
dialectical arguments of pure reason, its solution must engage the
attention of transcendental philosophy. Before attempting this
solution, a task which transcendental philosophy cannot decline, it
will be advisable to make a remark with regard to its procedure in the
settlement of the question.

If phenomena were things in themselves, and time and space forms of the
existence of things, condition and conditioned would always be members
of the same series; and thus would arise in the present case the
antinomy common to all transcendental ideas—that their series is either
too great or too small for the understanding. The dynamical ideas,
which we are about to discuss in this and the following section,
possess the peculiarity of relating to an object, not considered as a
quantity, but as an existence; and thus, in the discussion of the
present question, we may make abstraction of the quantity of the series
of conditions, and consider merely the dynamical relation of the
condition to the conditioned. The question, then, suggests itself,
whether freedom is possible; and, if it is, whether it can consist with
the universality of the natural law of causality; and, consequently,
whether we enounce a proper disjunctive proposition when we say: “Every
effect must have its origin either in nature or in freedom,” or whether
both cannot exist together in the same event in different relations.
The principle of an unbroken connection between all events in the
phenomenal world, in accordance with the unchangeable laws of nature,
is a well-established principle of transcendental analytic which admits
of no exception. The question, therefore, is: “Whether an effect,
determined according to the laws of nature, can at the same time be
produced by a free agent, or whether freedom and nature mutually
exclude each other?” And here, the common but fallacious hypothesis of
the absolute reality of phenomena manifests its injurious influence in
embarrassing the procedure of reason. For if phenomena are things in
themselves, freedom is impossible. In this case, nature is the complete
and all-sufficient cause of every event; and condition and conditioned,
cause and effect are contained in the same series, and necessitated by
the same law. If, on the contrary, phenomena are held to be, as they
are in fact, nothing more than mere representations, connected with
each other in accordance with empirical laws, they must have a ground
which is not phenomenal. But the causality of such an intelligible
cause is not determined or determinable by phenomena; although its
effects, as phenomena, must be determined by other phenomenal
existences. This cause and its causality exist therefore out of and
apart from the series of phenomena; while its effects do exist and are
discoverable in the series of empirical conditions. Such an effect may
therefore be considered to be free in relation to its intelligible
cause, and necessary in relation to the phenomena from which it is a
necessary consequence—a distinction which, stated in this perfectly
general and abstract manner, must appear in the highest degree subtle
and obscure. The sequel will explain. It is sufficient, at present, to
remark that, as the complete and unbroken connection of phenomena is an
unalterable law of nature, freedom is impossible—on the supposition
that phenomena are absolutely real. Hence those philosophers who adhere
to the common opinion on this subject can never succeed in reconciling
the ideas of nature and freedom.

_Possibility of Freedom in Harmony with the Universal Law of Natural
Necessity._

That element in a sensuous object which is not itself sensuous, I may
be allowed to term intelligible. If, accordingly, an object which must
be regarded as a sensuous phenomenon possesses a faculty which is not
an object of sensuous intuition, but by means of which it is capable of
being the cause of phenomena, the causality of an object or existence
of this kind may be regarded from two different points of view. It may
be considered to be intelligible, as regards its action—the action of a
thing which is a thing in itself, and sensuous, as regards its
effects—the effects of a phenomenon belonging to the sensuous world. We
should accordingly, have to form both an empirical and an intellectual
conception of the causality of such a faculty or power—both, however,
having reference to the same effect. This twofold manner of cogitating
a power residing in a sensuous object does not run counter to any of
the conceptions which we ought to form of the world of phenomena or of
a possible experience. Phenomena—not being things in themselves—must
have a transcendental object as a foundation, which determines them as
mere representations; and there seems to be no reason why we should not
ascribe to this transcendental object, in addition to the property of
self-phenomenization, a causality whose effects are to be met with in
the world of phenomena, although it is not itself a phenomenon. But
every effective cause must possess a character, that is to say, a law
of its causality, without which it would cease to be a cause. In the
above case, then, every sensuous object would possess an empirical
character, which guaranteed that its actions, as phenomena, stand in
complete and harmonious connection, conformably to unvarying natural
laws, with all other phenomena, and can be deduced from these, as
conditions, and that they do thus, in connection with these, constitute
a series in the order of nature. This sensuous object must, in the
second place, possess an intelligible character, which guarantees it to
be the cause of those actions, as phenomena, although it is not itself
a phenomenon nor subordinate to the conditions of the world of sense.
The former may be termed the character of the thing as a phenomenon,
the latter the character of the thing as a thing in itself.

Now this active subject would, in its character of intelligible
subject, be subordinate to no conditions of time, for time is only a
condition of phenomena, and not of things in themselves. No action
would begin or cease to be in this subject; it would consequently be
free from the law of all determination of time—the law of change,
namely, that everything which happens must have a cause in the
phenomena of a preceding state. In one word, the causality of the
subject, in so far as it is intelligible, would not form part of the
series of empirical conditions which determine and necessitate an event
in the world of sense. Again, this intelligible character of a thing
cannot be immediately cognized, because we can perceive nothing but
phenomena, but it must be capable of being cogitated in harmony with
the empirical character; for we always find ourselves compelled to
place, in thought, a transcendental object at the basis of phenomena
although we can never know what this object is in itself.

In virtue of its empirical character, this subject would at the same
time be subordinate to all the empirical laws of causality, and, as a
phenomenon and member of the sensuous world, its effects would have to
be accounted for by a reference to preceding phenomena. Eternal
phenomena must be capable of influencing it; and its actions, in
accordance with natural laws, must explain to us how its empirical
character, that is, the law of its causality, is to be cognized in and
by means of experience. In a word, all requisites for a complete and
necessary determination of these actions must be presented to us by
experience.

In virtue of its intelligible character, on the other hand (although we
possess only a general conception of this character), the subject must
be regarded as free from all sensuous influences, and from all
phenomenal determination. Moreover, as nothing happens in this
subject—for it is a noumenon, and there does not consequently exist in
it any change, demanding the dynamical determination of time, and for
the same reason no connection with phenomena as causes—this active
existence must in its actions be free from and independent of natural
necessity, for this necessity exists only in the world of phenomena. It
would be quite correct to say that it originates or begins its effects
in the world of sense from itself, although the action productive of
these effects does not begin in itself. We should not be in this case
affirming that these sensuous effects began to exist of themselves,
because they are always determined by prior empirical conditions—by
virtue of the empirical character, which is the phenomenon of the
intelligible character—and are possible only as constituting a
continuation of the series of natural causes. And thus nature and
freedom, each in the complete and absolute signification of these
terms, can exist, without contradiction or disagreement, in the same
action.

_Exposition of the Cosmological Idea of Freedom in Harmony with the
Universal Law of Natural Necessity._

I have thought it advisable to lay before the reader at first merely a
sketch of the solution of this transcendental problem, in order to
enable him to form with greater ease a clear conception of the course
which reason must adopt in the solution. I shall now proceed to exhibit
the several momenta of this solution, and to consider them in their
order.

The natural law that everything which happens must have a cause, that
the causality of this cause, that is, the action of the cause (which
cannot always have existed, but must be itself an event, for it
precedes in time some effect which it has originated), must have itself
a phenomenal cause, by which it is determined and, and, consequently,
all events are empirically determined in an order of nature—this law, I
say, which lies at the foundation of the possibility of experience, and
of a connected system of phenomena or nature is a law of the
understanding, from which no departure, and to which no exception, can
be admitted. For to except even a single phenomenon from its operation
is to exclude it from the sphere of possible experience and thus to
admit it to be a mere fiction of thought or phantom of the brain.

Thus we are obliged to acknowledge the existence of a chain of causes,
in which, however, absolute totality cannot be found. But we need not
detain ourselves with this question, for it has already been
sufficiently answered in our discussion of the antinomies into which
reason falls, when it attempts to reach the unconditioned in the series
of phenomena. If we permit ourselves to be deceived by the illusion of
transcendental idealism, we shall find that neither nature nor freedom
exists. Now the question is: “Whether, admitting the existence of
natural necessity in the world of phenomena, it is possible to consider
an effect as at the same time an effect of nature and an effect of
freedom—or, whether these two modes of causality are contradictory and
incompatible?”

No phenomenal cause can absolutely and of itself begin a series. Every
action, in so far as it is productive of an event, is itself an event
or occurrence, and presupposes another preceding state, in which its
cause existed. Thus everything that happens is but a continuation of a
series, and an absolute beginning is impossible in the sensuous world.
The actions of natural causes are, accordingly, themselves effects, and
presuppose causes preceding them in time. A primal action which forms
an absolute beginning, is beyond the causal power of phenomena.

Now, is it absolutely necessary that, granting that all effects are
phenomena, the causality of the cause of these effects must also be a
phenomenon and belong to the empirical world? Is it not rather possible
that, although every effect in the phenomenal world must be connected
with an empirical cause, according to the universal law of nature, this
empirical causality may be itself the effect of a non-empirical and
intelligible causality—its connection with natural causes remaining
nevertheless intact? Such a causality would be considered, in reference
to phenomena, as the primal action of a cause, which is in so far,
therefore, not phenomenal, but, by reason of this faculty or power,
intelligible; although it must, at the same time, as a link in the
chain of nature, be regarded as belonging to the sensuous world.

A belief in the reciprocal causality of phenomena is necessary, if we
are required to look for and to present the natural conditions of
natural events, that is to say, their causes. This being admitted as
unexceptionably valid, the requirements of the understanding, which
recognizes nothing but nature in the region of phenomena, are
satisfied, and our physical explanations of physical phenomena may
proceed in their regular course, without hindrance and without
opposition. But it is no stumbling-block in the way, even assuming the
idea to be a pure fiction, to admit that there are some natural causes
in the possession of a faculty which is not empirical, but
intelligible, inasmuch as it is not determined to action by empirical
conditions, but purely and solely upon grounds brought forward by the
understanding—this action being still, when the cause is phenomenized,
in perfect accordance with the laws of empirical causality. Thus the
acting subject, as a causal phenomenon, would continue to preserve a
complete connection with nature and natural conditions; and the
phenomenon only of the subject (with all its phenomenal causality)
would contain certain conditions, which, if we ascend from the
empirical to the transcendental object, must necessarily be regarded as
intelligible. For, if we attend, in our inquiries with regard to causes
in the world of phenomena, to the directions of nature alone, we need
not trouble ourselves about the relation in which the transcendental
subject, which is completely unknown to us, stands to these phenomena
and their connection in nature. The intelligible ground of phenomena in
this subject does not concern empirical questions. It has to do only
with pure thought; and, although the effects of this thought and action
of the pure understanding are discoverable in phenomena, these
phenomena must nevertheless be capable of a full and complete
explanation, upon purely physical grounds and in accordance with
natural laws. And in this case we attend solely to their empirical and
omit all consideration of their intelligible character (which is the
transcendental cause of the former) as completely unknown, except in so
far as it is exhibited by the latter as its empirical symbol. Now let
us apply this to experience. Man is a phenomenon of the sensuous world
and, at the same time, therefore, a natural cause, the causality of
which must be regulated by empirical laws. As such, he must possess an
empirical character, like all other natural phenomena. We remark this
empirical character in his actions, which reveal the presence of
certain powers and faculties. If we consider inanimate or merely animal
nature, we can discover no reason for ascribing to ourselves any other
than a faculty which is determined in a purely sensuous manner. But
man, to whom nature reveals herself only through sense, cognizes
himself not only by his senses, but also through pure apperception; and
this in actions and internal determinations, which he cannot regard as
sensuous impressions. He is thus to himself, on the one hand, a
phenomenon, but on the other hand, in respect of certain faculties, a
purely intelligible object—intelligible, because its action cannot be
ascribed to sensuous receptivity. These faculties are understanding and
reason. The latter, especially, is in a peculiar manner distinct from
all empirically-conditioned faculties, for it employs ideas alone in
the consideration of its objects, and by means of these determines the
understanding, which then proceeds to make an empirical use of its own
conceptions, which, like the ideas of reason, are pure and
non-empirical.

That reason possesses the faculty of causality, or that at least we are
compelled so to represent it, is evident from the imperatives, which in
the sphere of the practical we impose on many of our executive powers.
The words I ought express a species of necessity, and imply a
connection with grounds which nature does not and cannot present to the
mind of man. Understanding knows nothing in nature but that which is,
or has been, or will be. It would be absurd to say that anything in
nature ought to be other than it is in the relations of time in which
it stands; indeed, the ought, when we consider merely the course of
nature, has neither application nor meaning. The question, “What ought
to happen in the sphere of nature?” is just as absurd as the question,
“What ought to be the properties of a circle?” All that we are entitled
to ask is, “What takes place in nature?” or, in the latter case, “What
are the properties of a circle?”

But the idea of an ought or of duty indicates a possible action, the
ground of which is a pure conception; while the ground of a merely
natural action is, on the contrary, always a phenomenon. This action
must certainly be possible under physical conditions, if it is
prescribed by the moral imperative ought; but these physical or natural
conditions do not concern the determination of the will itself, they
relate to its effects alone, and the consequences of the effect in the
world of phenomena. Whatever number of motives nature may present to my
will, whatever sensuous impulses—the moral ought it is beyond their
power to produce. They may produce a volition, which, so far from being
necessary, is always conditioned—a volition to which the ought
enunciated by reason, sets an aim and a standard, gives permission or
prohibition. Be the object what it may, purely sensuous—as pleasure, or
presented by pure reason—as good, reason will not yield to grounds
which have an empirical origin. Reason will not follow the order of
things presented by experience, but, with perfect spontaneity,
rearranges them according to ideas, with which it compels empirical
conditions to agree. It declares, in the name of these ideas, certain
actions to be necessary which nevertheless have not taken place and
which perhaps never will take place; and yet presupposes that it
possesses the faculty of causality in relation to these actions. For,
in the absence of this supposition, it could not expect its ideas to
produce certain effects in the world of experience.

Now, let us stop here and admit it to be at least possible that reason
does stand in a really causal relation to phenomena. In this case it
must—pure reason as it is—exhibit an empirical character. For every
cause supposes a rule, according to which certain phenomena follow as
effects from the cause, and every rule requires uniformity in these
effects; and this is the proper ground of the conception of a cause—as
a faculty or power. Now this conception (of a cause) may be termed the
empirical character of reason; and this character is a permanent one,
while the effects produced appear, in conformity with the various
conditions which accompany and partly limit them, in various forms.

Thus the volition of every man has an empirical character, which is
nothing more than the causality of his reason, in so far as its effects
in the phenomenal world manifest the presence of a rule, according to
which we are enabled to examine, in their several kinds and degrees,
the actions of this causality and the rational grounds for these
actions, and in this way to decide upon the subjective principles of
the volition. Now we learn what this empirical character is only from
phenomenal effects, and from the rule of these which is presented by
experience; and for this reason all the actions of man in the world of
phenomena are determined by his empirical character, and the
co-operative causes of nature. If, then, we could investigate all the
phenomena of human volition to their lowest foundation in the mind,
there would be no action which we could not anticipate with certainty,
and recognize to be absolutely necessary from its preceding conditions.
So far as relates to this empirical character, therefore, there can be
no freedom; and it is only in the light of this character that we can
consider the human will, when we confine ourselves to simple
observation and, as is the case in anthropology, institute a
physiological investigation of the motive causes of human actions.

But when we consider the same actions in relation to reason—not for the
purpose of explaining their origin, that is, in relation to speculative
reason, but to practical reason, as the producing cause of these
actions—we shall discover a rule and an order very different from those
of nature and experience. For the declaration of this mental faculty
may be that what has and could not but take place in the course of
nature, ought not to have taken place. Sometimes, too, we discover, or
believe that we discover, that the ideas of reason did actually stand
in a causal relation to certain actions of man; and that these actions
have taken place because they were determined, not by empirical causes,
but by the act of the will upon grounds of reason.

Now, granting that reason stands in a causal relation to phenomena; can
an action of reason be called free, when we know that, sensuously, in
its empirical character, it is completely determined and absolutely
necessary? But this empirical character is itself determined by the
intelligible character. The latter we cannot cognize; we can only
indicate it by means of phenomena, which enable us to have an immediate
cognition only of the empirical character.[63] An action, then, in so
far as it is to be ascribed to an intelligible cause, does not result
from it in accordance with empirical laws. That is to say, not the
conditions of pure reason, but only their effects in the internal
sense, precede the act. Pure reason, as a purely intelligible faculty,
is not subject to the conditions of time. The causality of reason in
its intelligible character does not begin to be; it does not make its
appearance at a certain time, for the purpose of producing an effect.
If this were not the case, the causality of reason would be subservient
to the natural law of phenomena, which determines them according to
time, and as a series of causes and effects in time; it would
consequently cease to be freedom and become a part of nature. We are
therefore justified in saying: “If reason stands in a causal relation
to phenomena, it is a faculty which originates the sensuous condition
of an empirical series of effects.” For the condition, which resides in
the reason, is non-sensuous, and therefore cannot be originated, or
begin to be. And thus we find—what we could not discover in any
empirical series—a condition of a successive series of events itself
empirically unconditioned. For, in the present case, the condition
stands out of and beyond the series of phenomena—it is intelligible,
and it consequently cannot be subjected to any sensuous condition, or
to any time-determination by a preceding cause.

 [63] The real morality of actions—their merit or demerit, and even
 that of our own conduct, is completely unknown to us. Our estimates
 can relate only to their empirical character. How much is the result
 of the action of free will, how much is to be ascribed to nature and
 to blameless error, or to a happy constitution of temperament (merito
 fortunae), no one can discover, nor, for this reason, determine with
 perfect justice.

But, in another respect, the same cause belongs also to the series of
phenomena. Man is himself a phenomenon. His will has an empirical
character, which is the empirical cause of all his actions. There is no
condition—determining man and his volition in conformity with this
character—which does not itself form part of the series of effects in
nature, and is subject to their law—the law according to which an
empirically undetermined cause of an event in time cannot exist. For
this reason no given action can have an absolute and spontaneous
origination, all actions being phenomena, and belonging to the world of
experience. But it cannot be said of reason, that the state in which it
determines the will is always preceded by some other state determining
it. For reason is not a phenomenon, and therefore not subject to
sensuous conditions; and, consequently, even in relation to its
causality, the sequence or conditions of time do not influence reason,
nor can the dynamical law of nature, which determines the sequence of
time according to certain rules, be applied to it.

Reason is consequently the permanent condition of all actions of the
human will. Each of these is determined in the empirical character of
the man, even before it has taken place. The intelligible character, of
which the former is but the sensuous schema, knows no before or after;
and every action, irrespective of the time-relation in which it stands
with other phenomena, is the immediate effect of the intelligible
character of pure reason, which, consequently, enjoys freedom of
action, and is not dynamically determined either by internal or
external preceding conditions. This freedom must not be described, in a
merely negative manner, as independence of empirical conditions, for in
this case the faculty of reason would cease to be a cause of phenomena;
but it must be regarded, positively, as a faculty which can
spontaneously originate a series of events. At the same time, it must
not be supposed that any beginning can take place in reason; on the
contrary, reason, as the unconditioned condition of all action of the
will, admits of no time-conditions, although its effect does really
begin in a series of phenomena—a beginning which is not, however,
absolutely primal.

I shall illustrate this regulative principle of reason by an example,
from its employment in the world of experience; proved it cannot be by
any amount of experience, or by any number of facts, for such arguments
cannot establish the truth of transcendental propositions. Let us take
a voluntary action—for example, a falsehood—by means of which a man has
introduced a certain degree of confusion into the social life of
humanity, which is judged according to the motives from which it
originated, and the blame of which and of the evil consequences arising
from it, is imputed to the offender. We at first proceed to examine the
empirical character of the offence, and for this purpose we endeavour
to penetrate to the sources of that character, such as a defective
education, bad company, a shameless and wicked disposition, frivolity,
and want of reflection—not forgetting also the occasioning causes which
prevailed at the moment of the transgression. In this the procedure is
exactly the same as that pursued in the investigation of the series of
causes which determine a given physical effect. Now, although we
believe the action to have been determined by all these circumstances,
we do not the less blame the offender. We do not blame him for his
unhappy disposition, nor for the circumstances which influenced him,
nay, not even for his former course of life; for we presuppose that all
these considerations may be set aside, that the series of preceding
conditions may be regarded as having never existed, and that the action
may be considered as completely unconditioned in relation to any state
preceding, just as if the agent commenced with it an entirely new
series of effects. Our blame of the offender is grounded upon a law of
reason, which requires us to regard this faculty as a cause, which
could have and ought to have otherwise determined the behaviour of the
culprit, independently of all empirical conditions. This causality of
reason we do not regard as a co-operating agency, but as complete in
itself. It matters not whether the sensuous impulses favoured or
opposed the action of this causality, the offence is estimated
according to its intelligible character—the offender is decidedly
worthy of blame, the moment he utters a falsehood. It follows that we
regard reason, in spite of the empirical conditions of the act, as
completely free, and therefore, as in the present case,
culpable.

The above judgement is complete evidence that we are accustomed to
think that reason is not affected by sensuous conditions, that in it no
change takes place—although its phenomena, in other words, the mode in
which it appears in its effects, are subject to change—that in it no
preceding state determines the following, and, consequently, that it
does not form a member of the series of sensuous conditions which
necessitate phenomena according to natural laws. Reason is present and
the same in all human actions and at all times; but it does not itself
exist in time, and therefore does not enter upon any state in which it
did not formerly exist. It is, relatively to new states or conditions,
determining, but not determinable. Hence we cannot ask: “Why did not
reason determine itself in a different manner?” The question ought to
be thus stated: “Why did not reason employ its power of causality to
determine certain phenomena in a different manner?” But this is a
question which admits of no answer. For a different intelligible
character would have exhibited a different empirical character; and,
when we say that, in spite of the course which his whole former life
has taken, the offender could have refrained from uttering the
falsehood, this means merely that the act was subject to the power and
authority—permissive or prohibitive—of reason. Now, reason is not
subject in its causality to any conditions of phenomena or of time; and
a difference in time may produce a difference in the relation of
phenomena to each other—for these are not things and therefore not
causes in themselves—but it cannot produce any difference in the
relation in which the action stands to the faculty of reason.

Thus, then, in our investigation into free actions and the causal power
which produced them, we arrive at an intelligible cause, beyond which,
however, we cannot go; although we can recognize that it is free, that
is, independent of all sensuous conditions, and that, in this way, it
may be the sensuously unconditioned condition of phenomena. But for
what reason the intelligible character generates such and such
phenomena and exhibits such and such an empirical character under
certain circumstances, it is beyond the power of our reason to decide.
The question is as much above the power and the sphere of reason as the
following would be: “Why does the transcendental object of our external
sensuous intuition allow of no other form than that of intuition in
space?” But the problem, which we were called upon to solve, does not
require us to entertain any such questions. The problem was merely
this—whether freedom and natural necessity can exist without opposition
in the same action. To this question we have given a sufficient answer;
for we have shown that, as the former stands in a relation to a
different kind of condition from those of the latter, the law of the
one does not affect the law of the other and that, consequently, both
can exist together in independence of and without interference with
each other.

The reader must be careful to remark that my intention in the above
remarks has not been to prove the actual existence of freedom, as a
faculty in which resides the cause of certain sensuous phenomena. For,
not to mention that such an argument would not have a transcendental
character, nor have been limited to the discussion of pure
conceptions—all attempts at inferring from experience what cannot be
cogitated in accordance with its laws, must ever be unsuccessful. Nay,
more, I have not even aimed at demonstrating the possibility of
freedom; for this too would have been a vain endeavour, inasmuch as it
is beyond the power of the mind to cognize the possibility of a reality
or of a causal power by the aid of mere à priori conceptions. Freedom
has been considered in the foregoing remarks only as a transcendental
idea, by means of which reason aims at originating a series of
conditions in the world of phenomena with the help of that which is
sensuously unconditioned, involving itself, however, in an antinomy
with the laws which itself prescribes for the conduct of the
understanding. That this antinomy is based upon a mere illusion, and
that nature and freedom are at least not opposed—this was the only
thing in our power to prove, and the question which it was our task to
solve.

IV. Solution of the Cosmological Idea of the Totality of the Dependence
of Phenomenal Existences

In the preceding remarks, we considered the changes in the world of
sense as constituting a dynamical series, in which each member is
subordinated to another—as its cause. Our present purpose is to avail
ourselves of this series of states or conditions as a guide to an
existence which may be the highest condition of all changeable
phenomena, that is, to a necessary being. Our endeavour to reach, not
the unconditioned causality, but the unconditioned existence, of
substance. The series before us is therefore a series of conceptions,
and not of intuitions (in which the one intuition is the condition of
the other).

But it is evident that, as all phenomena are subject to change and
conditioned in their existence, the series of dependent existences
cannot embrace an unconditioned member, the existence of which would be
absolutely necessary. It follows that, if phenomena were things in
themselves, and—as an immediate consequence from this
supposition—condition and conditioned belonged to the same series of
phenomena, the existence of a necessary being, as the condition of the
existence of sensuous phenomena, would be perfectly impossible.

An important distinction, however, exists between the dynamical and the
mathematical regress. The latter is engaged solely with the combination
of parts into a whole, or with the division of a whole into its parts;
and therefore are the conditions of its series parts of the series, and
to be consequently regarded as homogeneous, and for this reason, as
consisting, without exception, of phenomena. If the former regress, on
the contrary, the aim of which is not to establish the possibility of
an unconditioned whole consisting of given parts, or of an
unconditioned part of a given whole, but to demonstrate the possibility
of the deduction of a certain state from its cause, or of the
contingent existence of substance from that which exists necessarily,
it is not requisite that the condition should form part of an empirical
series along with the conditioned.

In the case of the apparent antinomy with which we are at present
dealing, there exists a way of escape from the difficulty; for it is
not impossible that both of the contradictory statements may be true in
different relations. All sensuous phenomena may be contingent, and
consequently possess only an empirically conditioned existence, and yet
there may also exist a non-empirical condition of the whole series, or,
in other words, a necessary being. For this necessary being, as an
intelligible condition, would not form a member—not even the highest
member—of the series; the whole world of sense would be left in its
empirically determined existence uninterfered with and uninfluenced.
This would also form a ground of distinction between the modes of
solution employed for the third and fourth antinomies. For, while in
the consideration of freedom in the former antinomy, the thing
itself—the cause (substantia phaenomenon)—was regarded as belonging to
the series of conditions, and only its causality to the intelligible
world—we are obliged in the present case to cogitate this necessary
being as purely intelligible and as existing entirely apart from the
world of sense (as an ens extramundanum); for otherwise it would be
subject to the phenomenal law of contingency and dependence.

In relation to the present problem, therefore, the regulative principle
of reason is that everything in the sensuous world possesses an
empirically conditioned existence—that no property of the sensuous
world possesses unconditioned necessity—that we are bound to expect,
and, so far as is possible, to seek for the empirical condition of
every member in the series of conditions—and that there is no
sufficient reason to justify us in deducing any existence from a
condition which lies out of and beyond the empirical series, or in
regarding any existence as independent and self-subsistent; although
this should not prevent us from recognizing the possibility of the
whole series being based upon a being which is intelligible, and for
this reason free from all empirical conditions.

But it has been far from my intention, in these remarks, to prove the
existence of this unconditioned and necessary being, or even to
evidence the possibility of a purely intelligible condition of the
existence of all sensuous phenomena. As bounds were set to reason, to
prevent it from leaving the guiding thread of empirical conditions and
losing itself in transcendent theories which are incapable of concrete
presentation; so it was my purpose, on the other hand, to set bounds to
the law of the purely empirical understanding, and to protest against
any attempts on its part at deciding on the possibility of things, or
declaring the existence of the intelligible to be impossible, merely on
the ground that it is not available for the explanation and exposition
of phenomena. It has been shown, at the same time, that the contingency
of all the phenomena of nature and their empirical conditions is quite
consistent with the arbitrary hypothesis of a necessary, although
purely intelligible condition, that no real contradiction exists
between them and that, consequently, both may be true. The existence of
such an absolutely necessary being may be impossible; but this can
never be demonstrated from the universal contingency and dependence of
sensuous phenomena, nor from the principle which forbids us to
discontinue the series at some member of it, or to seek for its cause
in some sphere of existence beyond the world of nature. Reason goes its
way in the empirical world, and follows, too, its peculiar path in the
sphere of the transcendental.

The sensuous world contains nothing but phenomena, which are mere
representations, and always sensuously conditioned; things in
themselves are not, and cannot be, objects to us. It is not to be
wondered at, therefore, that we are not justified in leaping from some
member of an empirical series beyond the world of sense, as if
empirical representations were things in themselves, existing apart
from their transcendental ground in the human mind, and the cause of
whose existence may be sought out of the empirical series. This would
certainly be the case with contingent things; but it cannot be with
mere representations of things, the contingency of which is itself
merely a phenomenon and can relate to no other regress than that which
determines phenomena, that is, the empirical. But to cogitate an
intelligible ground of phenomena, as free, moreover, from the
contingency of the latter, conflicts neither with the unlimited nature
of the empirical regress, nor with the complete contingency of
phenomena. And the demonstration of this was the only thing necessary
for the solution of this apparent antinomy. For if the condition of
every conditioned—as regards its existence—is sensuous, and for this
reason a part of the same series, it must be itself conditioned, as was
shown in the antithesis of the fourth antinomy. The embarrassments into
which a reason, which postulates the unconditioned, necessarily falls,
must, therefore, continue to exist; or the unconditioned must be placed
in the sphere of the intelligible. In this way, its necessity does not
require, nor does it even permit, the presence of an empirical
condition: and it is, consequently, unconditionally necessary.

The empirical employment of reason is not affected by the assumption of
a purely intelligible being; it continues its operations on the
principle of the contingency of all phenomena, proceeding from
empirical conditions to still higher and higher conditions, themselves
empirical. Just as little does this regulative principle exclude the
assumption of an intelligible cause, when the question regards merely
the pure employment of reason—in relation to ends or aims. For, in this
case, an intelligible cause signifies merely the transcendental and to
us unknown ground of the possibility of sensuous phenomena, and its
existence, necessary and independent of all sensuous conditions, is not
inconsistent with the contingency of phenomena, or with the unlimited
possibility of regress which exists in the series of empirical
conditions.

Concluding Remarks on the Antinomy of Pure Reason.

So long as the object of our rational conceptions is the totality of
conditions in the world of phenomena, and the satisfaction, from this
source, of the requirements of reason, so long are our ideas
transcendental and cosmological. But when we set the
unconditioned—which is the aim of all our inquiries—in a sphere which
lies out of the world of sense and possible experience, our ideas
become transcendent. They are then not merely serviceable towards the
completion of the exercise of reason (which remains an idea, never
executed, but always to be pursued); they detach themselves completely
from experience and construct for themselves objects, the material of
which has not been presented by experience, and the objective reality
of which is not based upon the completion of the empirical series, but
upon pure à priori conceptions. The intelligible object of these
transcendent ideas may be conceded, as a transcendental object. But we
cannot cogitate it as a thing determinable by certain distinct
predicates relating to its internal nature, for it has no connection
with empirical conceptions; nor are we justified in affirming the
existence of any such object. It is, consequently, a mere product of
the mind alone. Of all the cosmological ideas, however, it is that
occasioning the fourth antinomy which compels us to venture upon this
step. For the existence of phenomena, always conditioned and never
self-subsistent, requires us to look for an object different from
phenomena—an intelligible object, with which all contingency must
cease. But, as we have allowed ourselves to assume the existence of a
self-subsistent reality out of the field of experience, and are
therefore obliged to regard phenomena as merely a contingent mode of
representing intelligible objects employed by beings which are
themselves intelligences—no other course remains for us than to follow
analogy and employ the same mode in forming some conception of
intelligible things, of which we have not the least knowledge, which
nature taught us to use in the formation of empirical conceptions.
Experience made us acquainted with the contingent. But we are at
present engaged in the discussion of things which are not objects of
experience; and must, therefore, deduce our knowledge of them from that
which is necessary absolutely and in itself, that is, from pure
conceptions. Hence the first step which we take out of the world of
sense obliges us to begin our system of new cognition with the
investigation of a necessary being, and to deduce from our conceptions
of it all our conceptions of intelligible things. This we propose to
attempt in the following chapter.

Chapter III. The Ideal of Pure Reason

Section I. Of the Ideal in General

We have seen that pure conceptions do not present objects to the mind,
except under sensuous conditions; because the conditions of objective
reality do not exist in these conceptions, which contain, in fact,
nothing but the mere form of thought. They may, however, when applied
to phenomena, be presented in concreto; for it is phenomena that
present to them the materials for the formation of empirical
conceptions, which are nothing more than concrete forms of the
conceptions of the understanding. But ideas are still further removed
from objective reality than categories; for no phenomenon can ever
present them to the human mind in concreto. They contain a certain
perfection, attainable by no possible empirical cognition; and they
give to reason a systematic unity, to which the unity of experience
attempts to approximate, but can never completely attain.

But still further removed than the idea from objective reality is the
Ideal, by which term I understand the idea, not in concreto, but in
individuo—as an individual thing, determinable or determined by the
idea alone. The idea of humanity in its complete perfection supposes
not only the advancement of all the powers and faculties, which
constitute our conception of human nature, to a complete attainment of
their final aims, but also everything which is requisite for the
complete determination of the idea; for of all contradictory
predicates, only one can conform with the idea of the perfect man. What
I have termed an ideal was in Plato’s philosophy an idea of the divine
mind—an individual object present to its pure intuition, the most
perfect of every kind of possible beings, and the archetype of all
phenomenal existences.

Without rising to these speculative heights, we are bound to confess
that human reason contains not only ideas, but ideals, which possess,
not, like those of Plato, creative, but certainly practical power—as
regulative principles, and form the basis of the perfectibility of
certain actions. Moral conceptions are not perfectly pure conceptions
of reason, because an empirical element—of pleasure or pain—lies at the
foundation of them. In relation, however, to the principle, whereby
reason sets bounds to a freedom which is in itself without law, and
consequently when we attend merely to their form, they may be
considered as pure conceptions of reason. Virtue and wisdom in their
perfect purity are ideas. But the wise man of the Stoics is an ideal,
that is to say, a human being existing only in thought and in complete
conformity with the idea of wisdom. As the idea provides a rule, so the
ideal serves as an archetype for the perfect and complete determination
of the copy. Thus the conduct of this wise and divine man serves us as
a standard of action, with which we may compare and judge ourselves,
which may help us to reform ourselves, although the perfection it
demands can never be attained by us. Although we cannot concede
objective reality to these ideals, they are not to be considered as
chimeras; on the contrary, they provide reason with a standard, which
enables it to estimate, by comparison, the degree of incompleteness in
the objects presented to it. But to aim at realizing the ideal in an
example in the world of experience—to describe, for instance, the
character of the perfectly wise man in a romance—is impracticable. Nay
more, there is something absurd in the attempt; and the result must be
little edifying, as the natural limitations, which are continually
breaking in upon the perfection and completeness of the idea, destroy
the illusion in the story and throw an air of suspicion even on what is
good in the idea, which hence appears fictitious and unreal.

Such is the constitution of the ideal of reason, which is always based
upon determinate conceptions, and serves as a rule and a model for
limitation or of criticism. Very different is the nature of the ideals
of the imagination. Of these it is impossible to present an
intelligible conception; they are a kind of monogram, drawn according
to no determinate rule, and forming rather a vague picture—the
production of many diverse experiences—than a determinate image. Such
are the ideals which painters and physiognomists profess to have in
their minds, and which can serve neither as a model for production nor
as a standard for appreciation. They may be termed, though improperly,
sensuous ideals, as they are declared to be models of certain possible
empirical intuitions. They cannot, however, furnish rules or standards
for explanation or examination.

In its ideals, reason aims at complete and perfect determination
according to à priori rules; and hence it cogitates an object, which
must be completely determinable in conformity with principles, although
all empirical conditions are absent, and the conception of the object
is on this account transcendent.

Section II. Of the Transcendental Ideal (Prototypon Trancendentale)

Every conception is, in relation to that which is not contained in it,
undetermined and subject to the principle of determinability. This
principle is that, of every two contradictorily opposed predicates,
only one can belong to a conception. It is a purely logical principle,
itself based upon the principle of contradiction; inasmuch as it makes
complete abstraction of the content and attends merely to the logical
form of the cognition.

But again, everything, as regards its possibility, is also subject to
the principle of complete determination, according to which one of all
the possible contradictory predicates of things must belong to it. This
principle is not based merely upon that of contradiction; for, in
addition to the relation between two contradictory predicates, it
regards everything as standing in a relation to the sum of
possibilities, as the sum total of all predicates of things, and, while
presupposing this sum as an à priori condition, presents to the mind
everything as receiving the possibility of its individual existence
from the relation it bears to, and the share it possesses in, the
aforesaid sum of possibilities.[64] The principle of complete
determination relates the content and not to the logical form. It is
the principle of the synthesis of all the predicates which are required
to constitute the complete conception of a thing, and not a mere
principle analytical representation, which enounces that one of two
contradictory predicates must belong to a conception. It contains,
moreover, a transcendental presupposition—that, namely, of the material
for all possibility, which must contain à priori the data for this or
that particular possibility.

 [64] Thus this principle declares everything to possess a relation to
 a common correlate—the sum-total of possibility, which, if discovered
 to exist in the idea of one individual thing, would establish the
 affinity of all possible things, from the identity of the ground of
 their complete determination. The determinability of every conception
 is subordinate to the universality (Allgemeinheit, universalitas) of
 the principle of excluded middle; the determination of a thing to the
 totality (Allheit, universitas) of all possible predicates.

The proposition, everything which exists is completely determined,
means not only that one of every pair of given contradictory
attributes, but that one of all possible attributes, is always
predicable of the thing; in it the predicates are not merely compared
logically with each other, but the thing itself is transcendentally
compared with the sum-total of all possible predicates. The proposition
is equivalent to saying: “To attain to a complete knowledge of a thing,
it is necessary to possess a knowledge of everything that is possible,
and to determine it thereby in a positive or negative manner.” The
conception of complete determination is consequently a conception which
cannot be presented in its totality in concreto, and is therefore based
upon an idea, which has its seat in the reason—the faculty which
prescribes to the understanding the laws of its harmonious and perfect
exercise.

Now, although this idea of the sum-total of all possibility, in so far
as it forms the condition of the complete determination of everything,
is itself undetermined in relation to the predicates which may
constitute this sum-total, and we cogitate in it merely the sum-total
of all possible predicates—we nevertheless find, upon closer
examination, that this idea, as a primitive conception of the mind,
excludes a large number of predicates—those deduced and those
irreconcilable with others, and that it is evolved as a conception
completely determined à priori. Thus it becomes the conception of an
individual object, which is completely determined by and through the
mere idea, and must consequently be termed an ideal of pure reason.

When we consider all possible predicates, not merely logically, but
transcendentally, that is to say, with reference to the content which
may be cogitated as existing in them à priori, we shall find that some
indicate a being, others merely a non-being. The logical negation
expressed in the word not does not properly belong to a conception, but
only to the relation of one conception to another in a judgement, and
is consequently quite insufficient to present to the mind the content
of a conception. The expression not mortal does not indicate that a
non-being is cogitated in the object; it does not concern the content
at all. A transcendental negation, on the contrary, indicates non-being
in itself, and is opposed to transcendental affirmation, the conception
of which of itself expresses a being. Hence this affirmation indicates
a reality, because in and through it objects are considered to be
something—to be things; while the opposite negation, on the other hand,
indicates a mere want, or privation, or absence, and, where such
negations alone are attached to a representation, the non-existence of
anything corresponding to the representation.

Now a negation cannot be cogitated as determined, without cogitating at
the same time the opposite affirmation. The man born blind has not the
least notion of darkness, because he has none of light; the vagabond
knows nothing of poverty, because he has never known what it is to be
in comfort;[65] the ignorant man has no conception of his ignorance,
because he has no conception of knowledge. All conceptions of negatives
are accordingly derived or deduced conceptions; and realities contain
the data, and, so to speak, the material or transcendental content of
the possibility and complete determination of all things.

 [65] The investigations and calculations of astronomers have taught us
 much that is wonderful; but the most important lesson we have received
 from them is the discovery of the abyss of our ignorance in relation
 to the universe—an ignorance the magnitude of which reason, without
 the information thus derived, could never have conceived. This
 discovery of our deficiencies must produce a great change in the
 determination of the aims of human reason.

If, therefore, a transcendental substratum lies at the foundation of
the complete determination of things—a substratum which is to form the
fund from which all possible predicates of things are to be supplied,
this substratum cannot be anything else than the idea of a sum-total of
reality (omnitudo realitatis). In this view, negations are nothing but
limitations—a term which could not, with propriety, be applied to them,
if the unlimited (the all) did not form the true basis of our
conception.

This conception of a sum-total of reality is the conception of a thing
in itself, regarded as completely determined; and the conception of an
ens realissimum is the conception of an individual being, inasmuch as
it is determined by that predicate of all possible contradictory
predicates, which indicates and belongs to being. It is, therefore, a
transcendental ideal which forms the basis of the complete
determination of everything that exists, and is the highest material
condition of its possibility—a condition on which must rest the
cogitation of all objects with respect to their content. Nay, more,
this ideal is the only proper ideal of which the human mind is capable;
because in this case alone a general conception of a thing is
completely determined by and through itself, and cognized as the
representation of an individuum.

The logical determination of a conception is based upon a disjunctive
syllogism, the major of which contains the logical division of the
extent of a general conception, the minor limits this extent to a
certain part, while the conclusion determines the conception by this
part. The general conception of a reality cannot be divided à priori,
because, without the aid of experience, we cannot know any determinate
kinds of reality, standing under the former as the genus. The
transcendental principle of the complete determination of all things is
therefore merely the representation of the sum-total of all reality; it
is not a conception which is the genus of all predicates under itself,
but one which comprehends them all within itself. The complete
determination of a thing is consequently based upon the limitation of
this total of reality, so much being predicated of the thing, while all
that remains over is excluded—a procedure which is in exact agreement
with that of the disjunctive syllogism and the determination of the
objects in the conclusion by one of the members of the division. It
follows that reason, in laying the transcendental ideal at the
foundation of its determination of all possible things, takes a course
in exact analogy with that which it pursues in disjunctive syllogisms—a
proposition which formed the basis of the systematic division of all
transcendental ideas, according to which they are produced in complete
parallelism with the three modes of syllogistic reasoning employed by
the human mind.

It is self-evident that reason, in cogitating the necessary complete
determination of things, does not presuppose the existence of a being
corresponding to its ideal, but merely the idea of the ideal—for the
purpose of deducing from the unconditional totality of complete
determination, The ideal is therefore the prototype of all things,
which, as defective copies (ectypa), receive from it the material of
their possibility, and approximate to it more or less, though it is
impossible that they can ever attain to its perfection.

The possibility of things must therefore be regarded as derived—except
that of the thing which contains in itself all reality, which must be
considered to be primitive and original. For all negations—and they are
the only predicates by means of which all other things can be
distinguished from the ens realissimum—are mere limitations of a
greater and a higher—nay, the highest reality; and they consequently
presuppose this reality, and are, as regards their content, derived
from it. The manifold nature of things is only an infinitely various
mode of limiting the conception of the highest reality, which is their
common substratum; just as all figures are possible only as different
modes of limiting infinite space. The object of the ideal of reason—an
object existing only in reason itself—is also termed the primal being
(ens originarium); as having no existence superior to him, the supreme
being (ens summum); and as being the condition of all other beings,
which rank under it, the being of all beings (ens entium). But none of
these terms indicate the objective relation of an actually existing
object to other things, but merely that of an idea to conceptions; and
all our investigations into this subject still leave us in perfect
uncertainty with regard to the existence of this being.

A primal being cannot be said to consist of many other beings with an
existence which is derivative, for the latter presuppose the former,
and therefore cannot be constitutive parts of it. It follows that the
ideal of the primal being must be cogitated as simple.

The deduction of the possibility of all other things from this primal
being cannot, strictly speaking, be considered as a limitation, or as a
kind of division of its reality; for this would be regarding the primal
being as a mere aggregate—which has been shown to be impossible,
although it was so represented in our first rough sketch. The highest
reality must be regarded rather as the ground than as the sum-total of
the possibility of all things, and the manifold nature of things be
based, not upon the limitation of the primal being itself, but upon the
complete series of effects which flow from it. And thus all our powers
of sense, as well as all phenomenal reality, may be with propriety
regarded as belonging to this series of effects, while they could not
have formed parts of the idea, considered as an aggregate. Pursuing
this track, and hypostatizing this idea, we shall find ourselves
authorized to determine our notion of the Supreme Being by means of the
mere conception of a highest reality, as one, simple, all-sufficient,
eternal, and so on—in one word, to determine it in its unconditioned
completeness by the aid of every possible predicate. The conception of
such a being is the conception of God in its transcendental sense, and
thus the ideal of pure reason is the object-matter of a transcendental
theology.

But, by such an employment of the transcendental idea, we should be
over stepping the limits of its validity and purpose. For reason placed
it, as the conception of all reality, at the basis of the complete
determination of things, without requiring that this conception be
regarded as the conception of an objective existence. Such an existence
would be purely fictitious, and the hypostatizing of the content of the
idea into an ideal, as an individual being, is a step perfectly
unauthorized. Nay, more, we are not even called upon to assume the
possibility of such an hypothesis, as none of the deductions drawn from
such an ideal would affect the complete determination of things in
general—for the sake of which alone is the idea necessary.

It is not sufficient to circumscribe the procedure and the dialectic of
reason; we must also endeavour to discover the sources of this
dialectic, that we may have it in our power to give a rational
explanation of this illusion, as a phenomenon of the human mind. For
the ideal, of which we are at present speaking, is based, not upon an
arbitrary, but upon a natural, idea. The question hence arises: How
happens it that reason regards the possibility of all things as deduced
from a single possibility, that, to wit, of the highest reality, and
presupposes this as existing in an individual and primal being?

The answer is ready; it is at once presented by the procedure of
transcendental analytic. The possibility of sensuous objects is a
relation of these objects to thought, in which something (the empirical
form) may be cogitated à priori; while that which constitutes the
matter—the reality of the phenomenon (that element which corresponds to
sensation)—must be given from without, as otherwise it could not even
be cogitated by, nor could its possibility be presentable to the mind.
Now, a sensuous object is completely determined, when it has been
compared with all phenomenal predicates, and represented by means of
these either positively or negatively. But, as that which constitutes
the thing itself—the real in a phenomenon, must be given, and that, in
which the real of all phenomena is given, is experience, one, sole, and
all-embracing—the material of the possibility of all sensuous objects
must be presupposed as given in a whole, and it is upon the limitation
of this whole that the possibility of all empirical objects, their
distinction from each other and their complete determination, are
based. Now, no other objects are presented to us besides sensuous
objects, and these can be given only in connection with a possible
experience; it follows that a thing is not an object to us, unless it
presupposes the whole or sum-total of empirical reality as the
condition of its possibility. Now, a natural illusion leads us to
consider this principle, which is valid only of sensuous objects, as
valid with regard to things in general. And thus we are induced to hold
the empirical principle of our conceptions of the possibility of
things, as phenomena, by leaving out this limitative condition, to be a
transcendental principle of the possibility of things in general.

We proceed afterwards to hypostatize this idea of the sum-total of all
reality, by changing the distributive unity of the empirical exercise
of the understanding into the collective unity of an empirical whole—a
dialectical illusion, and by cogitating this whole or sum of experience
as an individual thing, containing in itself all empirical reality.
This individual thing or being is then, by means of the above-mentioned
transcendental subreption, substituted for our notion of a thing which
stands at the head of the possibility of all things, the real
conditions of whose complete determination it presents.[66]

 [66] This ideal of the ens realissimum—although merely a mental
 representation—is first objectivized, that is, has an objective
 existence attributed to it, then hypostatized, and finally, by the
 natural progress of reason to the completion of unity, personified, as
 we shall show presently. For the regulative unity of experience is not
 based upon phenomena themselves, but upon the connection of the
 variety of phenomena by the understanding in a consciousness, and thus
 the unity of the supreme reality and the complete determinability of
 all things, seem to reside in a supreme understanding, and,
 consequently, in a conscious intelligence.

Section III. Of the Arguments employed by Speculative Reason in Proof
of the Existence of a Supreme Being

Notwithstanding the pressing necessity which reason feels, to form some
presupposition that shall serve the understanding as a proper basis for
the complete determination of its conceptions, the idealistic and
factitious nature of such a presupposition is too evident to allow
reason for a moment to persuade itself into a belief of the objective
existence of a mere creation of its own thought. But there are other
considerations which compel reason to seek out some resting place in
the regress from the conditioned to the unconditioned, which is not
given as an actual existence from the mere conception of it, although
it alone can give completeness to the series of conditions. And this is
the natural course of every human reason, even of the most uneducated,
although the path at first entered it does not always continue to
follow. It does not begin from conceptions, but from common experience,
and requires a basis in actual existence. But this basis is insecure,
unless it rests upon the immovable rock of the absolutely necessary.
And this foundation is itself unworthy of trust, if it leave under and
above it empty space, if it do not fill all, and leave no room for a
why or a wherefore, if it be not, in one word, infinite in its reality.

If we admit the existence of some one thing, whatever it may be, we
must also admit that there is something which exists necessarily. For
what is contingent exists only under the condition of some other thing,
which is its cause; and from this we must go on to conclude the
existence of a cause which is not contingent, and which consequently
exists necessarily and unconditionally. Such is the argument by which
reason justifies its advances towards a primal being.

Now reason looks round for the conception of a being that may be
admitted, without inconsistency, to be worthy of the attribute of
absolute necessity, not for the purpose of inferring à priori, from the
conception of such a being, its objective existence (for if reason
allowed itself to take this course, it would not require a basis in
given and actual existence, but merely the support of pure
conceptions), but for the purpose of discovering, among all our
conceptions of possible things, that conception which possesses no
element inconsistent with the idea of absolute necessity. For that
there must be some absolutely necessary existence, it regards as a
truth already established. Now, if it can remove every existence
incapable of supporting the attribute of absolute necessity, excepting
one—this must be the absolutely necessary being, whether its necessity
is comprehensible by us, that is, deducible from the conception of it
alone, or not.

Now that, the conception of which contains a therefore to every
wherefore, which is not defective in any respect whatever, which is
all-sufficient as a condition, seems to be the being of which we can
justly predicate absolute necessity—for this reason, that, possessing
the conditions of all that is possible, it does not and cannot itself
require any condition. And thus it satisfies, in one respect at least,
the requirements of the conception of absolute necessity. In this view,
it is superior to all other conceptions, which, as deficient and
incomplete, do not possess the characteristic of independence of all
higher conditions. It is true that we cannot infer from this that what
does not contain in itself the supreme and complete condition—the
condition of all other things—must possess only a conditioned
existence; but as little can we assert the contrary, for this supposed
being does not possess the only characteristic which can enable reason
to cognize by means of an à priori conception the unconditioned and
necessary nature of its existence.

The conception of an ens realissimum is that which best agrees with the
conception of an unconditioned and necessary being. The former
conception does not satisfy all the requirements of the latter; but we
have no choice, we are obliged to adhere to it, for we find that we
cannot do without the existence of a necessary being; and even although
we admit it, we find it out of our power to discover in the whole
sphere of possibility any being that can advance well-grounded claims
to such a distinction.

The following is, therefore, the natural course of human reason. It
begins by persuading itself of the existence of some necessary being.
In this being it recognizes the characteristics of unconditioned
existence. It then seeks the conception of that which is independent of
all conditions, and finds it in that which is itself the sufficient
condition of all other things—in other words, in that which contains
all reality. But the unlimited all is an absolute unity, and is
conceived by the mind as a being one and supreme; and thus reason
concludes that the Supreme Being, as the primal basis of all things,
possesses an existence which is absolutely necessary.

This conception must be regarded as in some degree satisfactory, if we
admit the existence of a necessary being, and consider that there
exists a necessity for a definite and final answer to these questions.
In such a case, we cannot make a better choice, or rather we have no
choice at all, but feel ourselves obliged to declare in favour of the
absolute unity of complete reality, as the highest source of the
possibility of things. But if there exists no motive for coming to a
definite conclusion, and we may leave the question unanswered till we
have fully weighed both sides—in other words, when we are merely called
upon to decide how much we happen to know about the question, and how
much we merely flatter ourselves that we know—the above conclusion does
not appear to be so great advantage, but, on the contrary, seems
defective in the grounds upon which it is supported.

For, admitting the truth of all that has been said, that, namely, the
inference from a given existence (my own, for example) to the existence
of an unconditioned and necessary being is valid and unassailable;
that, in the second place, we must consider a being which contains all
reality, and consequently all the conditions of other things, to be
absolutely unconditioned; and admitting too, that we have thus
discovered the conception of a thing to which may be attributed,
without inconsistency, absolute necessity—it does not follow from all
this that the conception of a limited being, in which the supreme
reality does not reside, is therefore incompatible with the idea of
absolute necessity. For, although I do not discover the element of the
unconditioned in the conception of such a being—an element which is
manifestly existent in the sum-total of all conditions—I am not
entitled to conclude that its existence is therefore conditioned; just
as I am not entitled to affirm, in a hypothetical syllogism, that where
a certain condition does not exist (in the present, completeness, as
far as pure conceptions are concerned), the conditioned does not exist
either. On the contrary, we are free to consider all limited beings as
likewise unconditionally necessary, although we are unable to infer
this from the general conception which we have of them. Thus conducted,
this argument is incapable of giving us the least notion of the
properties of a necessary being, and must be in every respect without
result.

This argument continues, however, to possess a weight and an authority,
which, in spite of its objective insufficiency, it has never been
divested of. For, granting that certain responsibilities lie upon us,
which, as based on the ideas of reason, deserve to be respected and
submitted to, although they are incapable of a real or practical
application to our nature, or, in other words, would be
responsibilities without motives, except upon the supposition of a
Supreme Being to give effect and influence to the practical laws: in
such a case we should be bound to obey our conceptions, which, although
objectively insufficient, do, according to the standard of reason,
preponderate over and are superior to any claims that may be advanced
from any other quarter. The equilibrium of doubt would in this case be
destroyed by a practical addition; indeed, Reason would be compelled to
condemn herself, if she refused to comply with the demands of the
judgement, no superior to which we know—however defective her
understanding of the grounds of these demands might be.

This argument, although in fact transcendental, inasmuch as it rests
upon the intrinsic insufficiency of the contingent, is so simple and
natural, that the commonest understanding can appreciate its value. We
see things around us change, arise, and pass away; they, or their
condition, must therefore have a cause. The same demand must again be
made of the cause itself—as a datum of experience. Now it is natural
that we should place the highest causality just where we place supreme
causality, in that being, which contains the conditions of all possible
effects, and the conception of which is so simple as that of an
all-embracing reality. This highest cause, then, we regard as
absolutely necessary, because we find it absolutely necessary to rise
to it, and do not discover any reason for proceeding beyond it. Thus,
among all nations, through the darkest polytheism glimmer some faint
sparks of monotheism, to which these idolaters have been led, not from
reflection and profound thought, but by the study and natural progress
of the common understanding.

There are only three modes of proving the existence of a Deity, on the
grounds of speculative reason.

All the paths conducting to this end begin either from determinate
experience and the peculiar constitution of the world of sense, and
rise, according to the laws of causality, from it to the highest cause
existing apart from the world—or from a purely indeterminate
experience, that is, some empirical existence—or abstraction is made of
all experience, and the existence of a supreme cause is concluded from
à priori conceptions alone. The first is the physico-theological
argument, the second the cosmological, the third the ontological. More
there are not, and more there cannot be.

I shall show it is as unsuccessful on the one path—the empirical—as on
the other—the transcendental, and that it stretches its wings in vain,
to soar beyond the world of sense by the mere might of speculative
thought. As regards the order in which we must discuss those arguments,
it will be exactly the reverse of that in which reason, in the progress
of its development, attains to them—the order in which they are placed
above. For it will be made manifest to the reader that, although
experience presents the occasion and the starting-point, it is the
transcendental idea of reason which guides it in its pilgrimage and is
the goal of all its struggles. I shall therefore begin with an
examination of the transcendental argument, and afterwards inquire what
additional strength has accrued to this mode of proof from the addition
of the empirical element.

Section IV. Of the Impossibility of an Ontological Proof of the
Existence of God

It is evident from what has been said that the conception of an
absolutely necessary being is a mere idea, the objective reality of
which is far from being established by the mere fact that it is a need
of reason. On the contrary, this idea serves merely to indicate a
certain unattainable perfection, and rather limits the operations than,
by the presentation of new objects, extends the sphere of the
understanding. But a strange anomaly meets us at the very threshold;
for the inference from a given existence in general to an absolutely
necessary existence seems to be correct and unavoidable, while the
conditions of the understanding refuse to aid us in forming any
conception of such a being.

Philosophers have always talked of an absolutely necessary being, and
have nevertheless declined to take the trouble of conceiving
whether—and how—a being of this nature is even cogitable, not to
mention that its existence is actually demonstrable. A verbal
definition of the conception is certainly easy enough: it is something
the non-existence of which is impossible. But does this definition
throw any light upon the conditions which render it impossible to
cogitate the non-existence of a thing—conditions which we wish to
ascertain, that we may discover whether we think anything in the
conception of such a being or not? For the mere fact that I throw away,
by means of the word unconditioned, all the conditions which the
understanding habitually requires in order to regard anything as
necessary, is very far from making clear whether by means of the
conception of the unconditionally necessary I think of something, or
really of nothing at all.

Nay, more, this chance-conception, now become so current, many have
endeavoured to explain by examples which seemed to render any inquiries
regarding its intelligibility quite needless. Every geometrical
proposition—a triangle has three angles—it was said, is absolutely
necessary; and thus people talked of an object which lay out of the
sphere of our understanding as if it were perfectly plain what the
conception of such a being meant.

All the examples adduced have been drawn, without exception, from
judgements, and not from things. But the unconditioned necessity of a
judgement does not form the absolute necessity of a thing. On the
contrary, the absolute necessity of a judgement is only a conditioned
necessity of a thing, or of the predicate in a judgement. The
proposition above-mentioned does not enounce that three angles
necessarily exist, but, upon condition that a triangle exists, three
angles must necessarily exist—in it. And thus this logical necessity
has been the source of the greatest delusions. Having formed an à
priori conception of a thing, the content of which was made to embrace
existence, we believed ourselves safe in concluding that, because
existence belongs necessarily to the object of the conception (that is,
under the condition of my positing this thing as given), the existence
of the thing is also posited necessarily, and that it is therefore
absolutely necessary—merely because its existence has been cogitated in
the conception.

If, in an identical judgement, I annihilate the predicate in thought,
and retain the subject, a contradiction is the result; and hence I say,
the former belongs necessarily to the latter. But if I suppress both
subject and predicate in thought, no contradiction arises; for there is
nothing at all, and therefore no means of forming a contradiction. To
suppose the existence of a triangle and not that of its three angles,
is self-contradictory; but to suppose the non-existence of both
triangle and angles is perfectly admissible. And so is it with the
conception of an absolutely necessary being. Annihilate its existence
in thought, and you annihilate the thing itself with all its
predicates; how then can there be any room for contradiction?
Externally, there is nothing to give rise to a contradiction, for a
thing cannot be necessary externally; nor internally, for, by the
annihilation or suppression of the thing itself, its internal
properties are also annihilated. God is omnipotent—that is a necessary
judgement. His omnipotence cannot be denied, if the existence of a
Deity is posited—the existence, that is, of an infinite being, the two
conceptions being identical. But when you say, God does not exist,
neither omnipotence nor any other predicate is affirmed; they must all
disappear with the subject, and in this judgement there cannot exist
the least self-contradiction.

You have thus seen that when the predicate of a judgement is
annihilated in thought along with the subject, no internal
contradiction can arise, be the predicate what it may. There is no
possibility of evading the conclusion—you find yourselves compelled to
declare: There are certain subjects which cannot be annihilated in
thought. But this is nothing more than saying: There exist subjects
which are absolutely necessary—the very hypothesis which you are called
upon to establish. For I find myself unable to form the slightest
conception of a thing which when annihilated in thought with all its
predicates, leaves behind a contradiction; and contradiction is the
only criterion of impossibility in the sphere of pure à priori
conceptions.

Against these general considerations, the justice of which no one can
dispute, one argument is adduced, which is regarded as furnishing a
satisfactory demonstration from the fact. It is affirmed that there is
one and only one conception, in which the non-being or annihilation of
the object is self-contradictory, and this is the conception of an ens
realissimum. It possesses, you say, all reality, and you feel
yourselves justified in admitting the possibility of such a being.
(This I am willing to grant for the present, although the existence of
a conception which is not self-contradictory is far from being
sufficient to prove the possibility of an object.)[67] Now the notion
of all reality embraces in it that of existence; the notion of
existence lies, therefore, in the conception of this possible thing. If
this thing is annihilated in thought, the internal possibility of the
thing is also annihilated, which is self-contradictory.

 [67] A conception is always possible, if it is not self-contradictory.
 This is the logical criterion of possibility, distinguishing the
 object of such a conception from the nihil negativum. But it may be,
 notwithstanding, an empty conception, unless the objective reality of
 this synthesis, but which it is generated, is demonstrated; and a
 proof of this kind must be based upon principles of possible
 experience, and not upon the principle of analysis or contradiction.
 This remark may be serviceable as a warning against concluding, from
 the possibility of a conception—which is logical—the possibility of a
 thing—which is real.

I answer: It is absurd to introduce—under whatever term disguised—into
the conception of a thing, which is to be cogitated solely in reference
to its possibility, the conception of its existence. If this is
admitted, you will have apparently gained the day, but in reality have
enounced nothing but a mere tautology. I ask, is the proposition, this
or that thing (which I am admitting to be possible) exists, an
analytical or a synthetical proposition? If the former, there is no
addition made to the subject of your thought by the affirmation of its
existence; but then the conception in your minds is identical with the
thing itself, or you have supposed the existence of a thing to be
possible, and then inferred its existence from its internal
possibility—which is but a miserable tautology. The word reality in the
conception of the thing, and the word existence in the conception of
the predicate, will not help you out of the difficulty. For, supposing
you were to term all positing of a thing reality, you have thereby
posited the thing with all its predicates in the conception of the
subject and assumed its actual existence, and this you merely repeat in
the predicate. But if you confess, as every reasonable person must,
that every existential proposition is synthetical, how can it be
maintained that the predicate of existence cannot be denied without
contradiction?—a property which is the characteristic of analytical
propositions, alone.

I should have a reasonable hope of putting an end for ever to this
sophistical mode of argumentation, by a strict definition of the
conception of existence, did not my own experience teach me that the
illusion arising from our confounding a logical with a real predicate
(a predicate which aids in the determination of a thing) resists almost
all the endeavours of explanation and illustration. A logical predicate
may be what you please, even the subject may be predicated of itself;
for logic pays no regard to the content of a judgement. But the
determination of a conception is a predicate, which adds to and
enlarges the conception. It must not, therefore, be contained in the
conception.

Being is evidently not a real predicate, that is, a conception of
something which is added to the conception of some other thing. It is
merely the positing of a thing, or of certain determinations in it.
Logically, it is merely the copula of a judgement. The proposition, God
is omnipotent, contains two conceptions, which have a certain object or
content; the word is, is no additional predicate—it merely indicates
the relation of the predicate to the subject. Now, if I take the
subject (God) with all its predicates (omnipotence being one), and say:
God is, or, There is a God, I add no new predicate to the conception of
God, I merely posit or affirm the existence of the subject with all its
predicates—I posit the object in relation to my conception. The content
of both is the same; and there is no addition made to the conception,
which expresses merely the possibility of the object, by my cogitating
the object—in the expression, it is—as absolutely given or existing.
Thus the real contains no more than the possible. A hundred real
dollars contain no more than a hundred possible dollars. For, as the
latter indicate the conception, and the former the object, on the
supposition that the content of the former was greater than that of the
latter, my conception would not be an expression of the whole object,
and would consequently be an inadequate conception of it. But in
reckoning my wealth there may be said to be more in a hundred real
dollars than in a hundred possible dollars—that is, in the mere
conception of them. For the real object—the dollars—is not analytically
contained in my conception, but forms a synthetical addition to my
conception (which is merely a determination of my mental state),
although this objective reality—this existence—apart from my
conceptions, does not in the least degree increase the aforesaid
hundred dollars.

By whatever and by whatever number of predicates—even to the complete
determination of it—I may cogitate a thing, I do not in the least
augment the object of my conception by the addition of the statement:
This thing exists. Otherwise, not exactly the same, but something more
than what was cogitated in my conception, would exist, and I could not
affirm that the exact object of my conception had real existence. If I
cogitate a thing as containing all modes of reality except one, the
mode of reality which is absent is not added to the conception of the
thing by the affirmation that the thing exists; on the contrary, the
thing exists—if it exist at all—with the same defect as that cogitated
in its conception; otherwise not that which was cogitated, but
something different, exists. Now, if I cogitate a being as the highest
reality, without defect or imperfection, the question still
remains—whether this being exists or not? For, although no element is
wanting in the possible real content of my conception, there is a
defect in its relation to my mental state, that is, I am ignorant
whether the cognition of the object indicated by the conception is
possible à posteriori. And here the cause of the present difficulty
becomes apparent. If the question regarded an object of sense merely,
it would be impossible for me to confound the conception with the
existence of a thing. For the conception merely enables me to cogitate
an object as according with the general conditions of experience; while
the existence of the object permits me to cogitate it as contained in
the sphere of actual experience. At the same time, this connection with
the world of experience does not in the least augment the conception,
although a possible perception has been added to the experience of the
mind. But if we cogitate existence by the pure category alone, it is
not to be wondered at, that we should find ourselves unable to present
any criterion sufficient to distinguish it from mere possibility.

Whatever be the content of our conception of an object, it is necessary
to go beyond it, if we wish to predicate existence of the object. In
the case of sensuous objects, this is attained by their connection
according to empirical laws with some one of my perceptions; but there
is no means of cognizing the existence of objects of pure thought,
because it must be cognized completely à priori. But all our knowledge
of existence (be it immediately by perception, or by inferences
connecting some object with a perception) belongs entirely to the
sphere of experience—which is in perfect unity with itself; and
although an existence out of this sphere cannot be absolutely declared
to be impossible, it is a hypothesis the truth of which we have no
means of ascertaining.

The notion of a Supreme Being is in many respects a highly useful idea;
but for the very reason that it is an idea, it is incapable of
enlarging our cognition with regard to the existence of things. It is
not even sufficient to instruct us as to the possibility of a being
which we do not know to exist. The analytical criterion of possibility,
which consists in the absence of contradiction in propositions, cannot
be denied it. But the connection of real properties in a thing is a
synthesis of the possibility of which an à priori judgement cannot be
formed, because these realities are not presented to us specifically;
and even if this were to happen, a judgement would still be impossible,
because the criterion of the possibility of synthetical cognitions must
be sought for in the world of experience, to which the object of an
idea cannot belong. And thus the celebrated Leibnitz has utterly failed
in his attempt to establish upon à priori grounds the possibility of
this sublime ideal being.

The celebrated ontological or Cartesian argument for the existence of a
Supreme Being is therefore insufficient; and we may as well hope to
increase our stock of knowledge by the aid of mere ideas, as the
merchant to augment his wealth by the addition of noughts to his cash
account.

Section V. Of the Impossibility of a Cosmological Proof of the
Existence of God

It was by no means a natural course of proceeding, but, on the
contrary, an invention entirely due to the subtlety of the schools, to
attempt to draw from a mere idea a proof of the existence of an object
corresponding to it. Such a course would never have been pursued, were
it not for that need of reason which requires it to suppose the
existence of a necessary being as a basis for the empirical regress,
and that, as this necessity must be unconditioned and à priori, reason
is bound to discover a conception which shall satisfy, if possible,
this requirement, and enable us to attain to the à priori cognition of
such a being. This conception was thought to be found in the idea of an
ens realissimum, and thus this idea was employed for the attainment of
a better defined knowledge of a necessary being, of the existence of
which we were convinced, or persuaded, on other grounds. Thus reason
was seduced from her natural courage; and, instead of concluding with
the conception of an ens realissimum, an attempt was made to begin with
it, for the purpose of inferring from it that idea of a necessary
existence which it was in fact called in to complete. Thus arose that
unfortunate ontological argument, which neither satisfies the healthy
common sense of humanity, nor sustains the scientific examination of
the philosopher.

The cosmological proof, which we are about to examine, retains the
connection between absolute necessity and the highest reality; but,
instead of reasoning from this highest reality to a necessary
existence, like the preceding argument, it concludes from the given
unconditioned necessity of some being its unlimited reality. The track
it pursues, whether rational or sophistical, is at least natural, and
not only goes far to persuade the common understanding, but shows
itself deserving of respect from the speculative intellect; while it
contains, at the same time, the outlines of all the arguments employed
in natural theology—arguments which always have been, and still will
be, in use and authority. These, however adorned, and hid under
whatever embellishments of rhetoric and sentiment, are at bottom
identical with the arguments we are at present to discuss. This proof,
termed by Leibnitz the argumentum a contingentia mundi, I shall now lay
before the reader, and subject to a strict examination.

It is framed in the following manner: If something exists, an
absolutely necessary being must likewise exist. Now I, at least, exist.
Consequently, there exists an absolutely necessary being. The minor
contains an experience, the major reasons from a general experience to
the existence of a necessary being.[68] Thus this argument really
begins at experience, and is not completely à priori, or ontological.
The object of all possible experience being the world, it is called the
cosmological proof. It contains no reference to any peculiar property
of sensuous objects, by which this world of sense might be
distinguished from other possible worlds; and in this respect it
differs from the physico-theological proof, which is based upon the
consideration of the peculiar constitution of our sensuous world.

 [68] This inference is too well known to require more detailed
 discussion. It is based upon the spurious transcendental law of
 causality, that everything which is contingent has a cause, which, if
 itself contingent, must also have a cause; and so on, till the series
 of subordinated causes must end with an absolutely necessary cause,
 without which it would not possess completeness.

The proof proceeds thus: A necessary being can be determined only in
one way, that is, it can be determined by only one of all possible
opposed predicates; consequently, it must be completely determined in
and by its conception. But there is only a single conception of a thing
possible, which completely determines the thing à priori: that is, the
conception of the ens realissimum. It follows that the conception of
the ens realissimum is the only conception by and in which we can
cogitate a necessary being. Consequently, a Supreme Being necessarily
exists.

In this cosmological argument are assembled so many sophistical
propositions that speculative reason seems to have exerted in it all
her dialectical skill to produce a transcendental illusion of the most
extreme character. We shall postpone an investigation of this argument
for the present, and confine ourselves to exposing the stratagem by
which it imposes upon us an old argument in a new dress, and appeals to
the agreement of two witnesses, the one with the credentials of pure
reason, and the other with those of empiricism; while, in fact, it is
only the former who has changed his dress and voice, for the purpose of
passing himself off for an additional witness. That it may possess a
secure foundation, it bases its conclusions upon experience, and thus
appears to be completely distinct from the ontological argument, which
places its confidence entirely in pure à priori conceptions. But this
experience merely aids reason in making one step—to the existence of a
necessary being. What the properties of this being are cannot be
learned from experience; and therefore reason abandons it altogether,
and pursues its inquiries in the sphere of pure conception, for the
purpose of discovering what the properties of an absolutely necessary
being ought to be, that is, what among all possible things contain the
conditions (requisita) of absolute necessity. Reason believes that it
has discovered these requisites in the conception of an ens
realissimum—and in it alone, and hence concludes: The ens realissimum
is an absolutely necessary being. But it is evident that reason has
here presupposed that the conception of an ens realissimum is perfectly
adequate to the conception of a being of absolute necessity, that is,
that we may infer the existence of the latter from that of the former—a
proposition which formed the basis of the ontological argument, and
which is now employed in the support of the cosmological argument,
contrary to the wish and professions of its inventors. For the
existence of an absolutely necessary being is given in conceptions
alone. But if I say: “The conception of the ens realissimum is a
conception of this kind, and in fact the only conception which is
adequate to our idea of a necessary being,” I am obliged to admit, that
the latter may be inferred from the former. Thus it is properly the
ontological argument which figures in the cosmological, and constitutes
the whole strength of the latter; while the spurious basis of
experience has been of no further use than to conduct us to the
conception of absolute necessity, being utterly insufficient to
demonstrate the presence of this attribute in any determinate existence
or thing. For when we propose to ourselves an aim of this character, we
must abandon the sphere of experience, and rise to that of pure
conceptions, which we examine with the purpose of discovering whether
any one contains the conditions of the possibility of an absolutely
necessary being. But if the possibility of such a being is thus
demonstrated, its existence is also proved; for we may then assert
that, of all possible beings there is one which possesses the attribute
of necessity—in other words, this being possesses an absolutely
necessary existence.

All illusions in an argument are more easily detected when they are
presented in the formal manner employed by the schools, which we now
proceed to do.

If the proposition: “Every absolutely necessary being is likewise an
ens realissimum,” is correct (and it is this which constitutes the
nervus probandi of the cosmological argument), it must, like all
affirmative judgements, be capable of conversion—the conversio per
accidens, at least. It follows, then, that some entia realissima are
absolutely necessary beings. But no ens realissimum is in any respect
different from another, and what is valid of some is valid of all. In
this present case, therefore, I may employ simple conversion, and say:
“Every ens realissimum is a necessary being.” But as this proposition
is determined à priori by the conceptions contained in it, the mere
conception of an ens realissimum must possess the additional attribute
of absolute necessity. But this is exactly what was maintained in the
ontological argument, and not recognized by the cosmological, although
it formed the real ground of its disguised and illusory reasoning.

Thus the second mode employed by speculative reason of demonstrating
the existence of a Supreme Being, is not only, like the first, illusory
and inadequate, but possesses the additional blemish of an ignoratio
elenchi—professing to conduct us by a new road to the desired goal, but
bringing us back, after a short circuit, to the old path which we had
deserted at its call.

I mentioned above that this cosmological argument contains a perfect
nest of dialectical assumptions, which transcendental criticism does
not find it difficult to expose and to dissipate. I shall merely
enumerate these, leaving it to the reader, who must by this time be
well practised in such matters, to investigate the fallacies residing
therein.

The following fallacies, for example, are discoverable in this mode of
proof: 1. The transcendental principle: “Everything that is contingent
must have a cause”—a principle without significance, except in the
sensuous world. For the purely intellectual conception of the
contingent cannot produce any synthetical proposition, like that of
causality, which is itself without significance or distinguishing
characteristic except in the phenomenal world. But in the present case
it is employed to help us beyond the limits of its sphere. 2. “From the
impossibility of an infinite ascending series of causes in the world of
sense a first cause is inferred”; a conclusion which the principles of
the employment of reason do not justify even in the sphere of
experience, and still less when an attempt is made to pass the limits
of this sphere. 3. Reason allows itself to be satisfied upon
insufficient grounds, with regard to the completion of this series. It
removes all conditions (without which, however, no conception of
Necessity can take place); and, as after this it is beyond our power to
form any other conceptions, it accepts this as a completion of the
conception it wishes to form of the series. 4. The logical possibility
of a conception of the total of reality (the criterion of this
possibility being the absence of contradiction) is confounded with the
transcendental, which requires a principle of the practicability of
such a synthesis—a principle which again refers us to the world of
experience. And so on.

The aim of the cosmological argument is to avoid the necessity of
proving the existence of a necessary being priori from mere
conceptions—a proof which must be ontological, and of which we feel
ourselves quite incapable. With this purpose, we reason from an actual
existence—an experience in general, to an absolutely necessary
condition of that existence. It is in this case unnecessary to
demonstrate its possibility. For after having proved that it exists,
the question regarding its possibility is superfluous. Now, when we
wish to define more strictly the nature of this necessary being, we do
not look out for some being the conception of which would enable us to
comprehend the necessity of its being—for if we could do this, an
empirical presupposition would be unnecessary; no, we try to discover
merely the negative condition (conditio sine qua non), without which a
being would not be absolutely necessary. Now this would be perfectly
admissible in every sort of reasoning, from a consequence to its
principle; but in the present case it unfortunately happens that the
condition of absolute necessity can be discovered in but a single
being, the conception of which must consequently contain all that is
requisite for demonstrating the presence of absolute necessity, and
thus entitle me to infer this absolute necessity à priori. That is, it
must be possible to reason conversely, and say: The thing, to which the
conception of the highest reality belongs, is absolutely necessary. But
if I cannot reason thus—and I cannot, unless I believe in the
sufficiency of the ontological argument—I find insurmountable obstacles
in my new path, and am really no farther than the point from which I
set out. The conception of a Supreme Being satisfies all questions à
priori regarding the internal determinations of a thing, and is for
this reason an ideal without equal or parallel, the general conception
of it indicating it as at the same time an ens individuum among all
possible things. But the conception does not satisfy the question
regarding its existence—which was the purpose of all our inquiries;
and, although the existence of a necessary being were admitted, we
should find it impossible to answer the question: What of all things in
the world must be regarded as such?

It is certainly allowable to admit the existence of an all-sufficient
being—a cause of all possible effects—for the purpose of enabling
reason to introduce unity into its mode and grounds of explanation with
regard to phenomena. But to assert that such a being necessarily
exists, is no longer the modest enunciation of an admissible
hypothesis, but the boldest declaration of an apodeictic certainty; for
the cognition of that which is absolutely necessary must itself possess
that character.

The aim of the transcendental ideal formed by the mind is either to
discover a conception which shall harmonize with the idea of absolute
necessity, or a conception which shall contain that idea. If the one is
possible, so is the other; for reason recognizes that alone as
absolutely necessary which is necessary from its conception. But both
attempts are equally beyond our power—we find it impossible to satisfy
the understanding upon this point, and as impossible to induce it to
remain at rest in relation to this incapacity.

Unconditioned necessity, which, as the ultimate support and stay of all
existing things, is an indispensable requirement of the mind, is an
abyss on the verge of which human reason trembles in dismay. Even the
idea of eternity, terrible and sublime as it is, as depicted by Haller,
does not produce upon the mental vision such a feeling of awe and
terror; for, although it measures the duration of things, it does not
support them. We cannot bear, nor can we rid ourselves of the thought
that a being, which we regard as the greatest of all possible
existences, should say to himself: I am from eternity to eternity;
beside me there is nothing, except that which exists by my will; whence
then am I? Here all sinks away from under us; and the greatest, as the
smallest, perfection, hovers without stay or footing in presence of the
speculative reason, which finds it as easy to part with the one as with
the other.

Many physical powers, which evidence their existence by their effects,
are perfectly inscrutable in their nature; they elude all our powers of
observation. The transcendental object which forms the basis of
phenomena, and, in connection with it, the reason why our sensibility
possesses this rather than that particular kind of conditions, are and
must ever remain hidden from our mental vision; the fact is there, the
reason of the fact we cannot see. But an ideal of pure reason cannot be
termed mysterious or inscrutable, because the only credential of its
reality is the need of it felt by reason, for the purpose of giving
completeness to the world of synthetical unity. An ideal is not even
given as a cogitable object, and therefore cannot be inscrutable; on
the contrary, it must, as a mere idea, be based on the constitution of
reason itself, and on this account must be capable of explanation and
solution. For the very essence of reason consists in its ability to
give an account, of all our conceptions, opinions, and assertions—upon
objective, or, when they happen to be illusory and fallacious, upon
subjective grounds.

Detection and Explanation of the Dialectical Illusion in all
Transcendental Arguments for the Existence of a Necessary Being.

Both of the above arguments are transcendental; in other words, they do
not proceed upon empirical principles. For, although the cosmological
argument professed to lay a basis of experience for its edifice of
reasoning, it did not ground its procedure upon the peculiar
constitution of experience, but upon pure principles of reason—in
relation to an existence given by empirical consciousness; utterly
abandoning its guidance, however, for the purpose of supporting its
assertions entirely upon pure conceptions. Now what is the cause, in
these transcendental arguments, of the dialectical, but natural,
illusion, which connects the conceptions of necessity and supreme
reality, and hypostatizes that which cannot be anything but an idea?
What is the cause of this unavoidable step on the part of reason, of
admitting that some one among all existing things must be necessary,
while it falls back from the assertion of the existence of such a being
as from an abyss? And how does reason proceed to explain this anomaly
to itself, and from the wavering condition of a timid and reluctant
approbation—always again withdrawn—arrive at a calm and settled insight
into its cause?

It is something very remarkable that, on the supposition that something
exists, I cannot avoid the inference that something exists necessarily.
Upon this perfectly natural—but not on that account reliable—inference
does the cosmological argument rest. But, let me form any conception
whatever of a thing, I find that I cannot cogitate the existence of the
thing as absolutely necessary, and that nothing prevents me—be the
thing or being what it may—from cogitating its non-existence. I may
thus be obliged to admit that all existing things have a necessary
basis, while I cannot cogitate any single or individual thing as
necessary. In other words, I can never complete the regress through the
conditions of existence, without admitting the existence of a necessary
being; but, on the other hand, I cannot make a commencement from this
being.

If I must cogitate something as existing necessarily as the basis of
existing things, and yet am not permitted to cogitate any individual
thing as in itself necessary, the inevitable inference is that
necessity and contingency are not properties of things
themselves—otherwise an internal contradiction would result; that
consequently neither of these principles are objective, but merely
subjective principles of reason—the one requiring us to seek for a
necessary ground for everything that exists, that is, to be satisfied
with no other explanation than that which is complete à priori, the
other forbidding us ever to hope for the attainment of this
completeness, that is, to regard no member of the empirical world as
unconditioned. In this mode of viewing them, both principles, in their
purely heuristic and regulative character, and as concerning merely the
formal interest of reason, are quite consistent with each other. The
one says: “You must philosophize upon nature,” as if there existed a
necessary primal basis of all existing things, solely for the purpose
of introducing systematic unity into your knowledge, by pursuing an
idea of this character—a foundation which is arbitrarily admitted to be
ultimate; while the other warns you to consider no individual
determination, concerning the existence of things, as such an ultimate
foundation, that is, as absolutely necessary, but to keep the way
always open for further progress in the deduction, and to treat every
determination as determined by some other. But if all that we perceive
must be regarded as conditionally necessary, it is impossible that
anything which is empirically given should be absolutely necessary.

It follows from this that you must accept the absolutely necessary as
out of and beyond the world, inasmuch as it is useful only as a
principle of the highest possible unity in experience, and you cannot
discover any such necessary existence in the would, the second rule
requiring you to regard all empirical causes of unity as themselves
deduced.

The philosophers of antiquity regarded all the forms of nature as
contingent; while matter was considered by them, in accordance with the
judgement of the common reason of mankind, as primal and necessary. But
if they had regarded matter, not relatively—as the substratum of
phenomena, but absolutely and in itself—as an independent existence,
this idea of absolute necessity would have immediately disappeared. For
there is nothing absolutely connecting reason with such an existence;
on the contrary, it can annihilate it in thought, always and without
self-contradiction. But in thought alone lay the idea of absolute
necessity. A regulative principle must, therefore, have been at the
foundation of this opinion. In fact, extension and
impenetrability—which together constitute our conception of matter—form
the supreme empirical principle of the unity of phenomena, and this
principle, in so far as it is empirically unconditioned, possesses the
property of a regulative principle. But, as every determination of
matter which constitutes what is real in it—and consequently
impenetrability—is an effect, which must have a cause, and is for this
reason always derived, the notion of matter cannot harmonize with the
idea of a necessary being, in its character of the principle of all
derived unity. For every one of its real properties, being derived,
must be only conditionally necessary, and can therefore be annihilated
in thought; and thus the whole existence of matter can be so
annihilated or suppressed. If this were not the case, we should have
found in the world of phenomena the highest ground or condition of
unity—which is impossible, according to the second regulative
principle. It follows that matter, and, in general, all that forms part
of the world of sense, cannot be a necessary primal being, nor even a
principle of empirical unity, but that this being or principle must
have its place assigned without the world. And, in this way, we can
proceed in perfect confidence to deduce the phenomena of the world and
their existence from other phenomena, just as if there existed no
necessary being; and we can at the same time, strive without ceasing
towards the attainment of completeness for our deduction, just as if
such a being—the supreme condition of all existences—were presupposed
by the mind.

These remarks will have made it evident to the reader that the ideal of
the Supreme Being, far from being an enouncement of the existence of a
being in itself necessary, is nothing more than a regulative principle
of reason, requiring us to regard all connection existing between
phenomena as if it had its origin from an all-sufficient necessary
cause, and basing upon this the rule of a systematic and necessary
unity in the explanation of phenomena. We cannot, at the same time,
avoid regarding, by a transcendental subreptio, this formal principle
as constitutive, and hypostatizing this unity. Precisely similar is the
case with our notion of space. Space is the primal condition of all
forms, which are properly just so many different limitations of it; and
thus, although it is merely a principle of sensibility, we cannot help
regarding it as an absolutely necessary and self-subsistent thing—as an
object given à priori in itself. In the same way, it is quite natural
that, as the systematic unity of nature cannot be established as a
principle for the empirical employment of reason, unless it is based
upon the idea of an ens realissimum, as the supreme cause, we should
regard this idea as a real object, and this object, in its character of
supreme condition, as absolutely necessary, and that in this way a
regulative should be transformed into a constitutive principle. This
interchange becomes evident when I regard this supreme being, which,
relatively to the world, was absolutely (unconditionally) necessary, as
a thing per se. In this case, I find it impossible to represent this
necessity in or by any conception, and it exists merely in my own mind,
as the formal condition of thought, but not as a material and
hypostatic condition of existence.

Section VI. Of the Impossibility of a Physico-Theological Proof

If, then, neither a pure conception nor the general experience of an
existing being can provide a sufficient basis for the proof of the
existence of the Deity, we can make the attempt by the only other
mode—that of grounding our argument upon a determinate experience of
the phenomena of the present world, their constitution and disposition,
and discover whether we can thus attain to a sound conviction of the
existence of a Supreme Being. This argument we shall term the
physico-theological argument. If it is shown to be insufficient,
speculative reason cannot present us with any satisfactory proof of the
existence of a being corresponding to our transcendental idea.

It is evident from the remarks that have been made in the preceding
sections, that an answer to this question will be far from being
difficult or unconvincing. For how can any experience be adequate with
an idea? The very essence of an idea consists in the fact that no
experience can ever be discovered congruent or adequate with it. The
transcendental idea of a necessary and all-sufficient being is so
immeasurably great, so high above all that is empirical, which is
always conditioned, that we hope in vain to find materials in the
sphere of experience sufficiently ample for our conception, and in vain
seek the unconditioned among things that are conditioned, while
examples, nay, even guidance is denied us by the laws of empirical
synthesis.

If the Supreme Being forms a link in the chain of empirical conditions,
it must be a member of the empirical series, and, like the lower
members which it precedes, have its origin in some higher member of the
series. If, on the other hand, we disengage it from the chain, and
cogitate it as an intelligible being, apart from the series of natural
causes—how shall reason bridge the abyss that separates the latter from
the former? All laws respecting the regress from effects to causes, all
synthetical additions to our knowledge relate solely to possible
experience and the objects of the sensuous world, and, apart from them,
are without significance.

The world around us opens before our view so magnificent a spectacle of
order, variety, beauty, and conformity to ends, that whether we pursue
our observations into the infinity of space in the one direction, or
into its illimitable divisions in the other, whether we regard the
world in its greatest or its least manifestations—even after we have
attained to the highest summit of knowledge which our weak minds can
reach, we find that language in the presence of wonders so
inconceivable has lost its force, and number its power to reckon, nay,
even thought fails to conceive adequately, and our conception of the
whole dissolves into an astonishment without power of expression—all
the more eloquent that it is dumb. Everywhere around us we observe a
chain of causes and effects, of means and ends, of death and birth;
and, as nothing has entered of itself into the condition in which we
find it, we are constantly referred to some other thing, which itself
suggests the same inquiry regarding its cause, and thus the universe
must sink into the abyss of nothingness, unless we admit that, besides
this infinite chain of contingencies, there exists something that is
primal and self-subsistent—something which, as the cause of this
phenomenal world, secures its continuance and preservation.

This highest cause—what magnitude shall we attribute to it? Of the
content of the world we are ignorant; still less can we estimate its
magnitude by comparison with the sphere of the possible. But this
supreme cause being a necessity of the human mind, what is there to
prevent us from attributing to it such a degree of perfection as to
place it above the sphere of all that is possible? This we can easily
do, although only by the aid of the faint outline of an abstract
conception, by representing this being to ourselves as containing in
itself, as an individual substance, all possible perfection—a
conception which satisfies that requirement of reason which demands
parsimony in principles, which is free from self-contradiction, which
even contributes to the extension of the employment of reason in
experience, by means of the guidance afforded by this idea to order and
system, and which in no respect conflicts with any law of experience.

This argument always deserves to be mentioned with respect. It is the
oldest, the clearest, and that most in conformity with the common
reason of humanity. It animates the study of nature, as it itself
derives its existence and draws ever new strength from that source. It
introduces aims and ends into a sphere in which our observation could
not of itself have discovered them, and extends our knowledge of
nature, by directing our attention to a unity, the principle of which
lies beyond nature. This knowledge of nature again reacts upon this
idea—its cause; and thus our belief in a divine author of the universe
rises to the power of an irresistible conviction.

For these reasons it would be utterly hopeless to attempt to rob this
argument of the authority it has always enjoyed. The mind, unceasingly
elevated by these considerations, which, although empirical, are so
remarkably powerful, and continually adding to their force, will not
suffer itself to be depressed by the doubts suggested by subtle
speculation; it tears itself out of this state of uncertainty, the
moment it casts a look upon the wondrous forms of nature and the
majesty of the universe, and rises from height to height, from
condition to condition, till it has elevated itself to the supreme and
unconditioned author of all.

But although we have nothing to object to the reasonableness and
utility of this procedure, but have rather to commend and encourage it,
we cannot approve of the claims which this argument advances to
demonstrative certainty and to a reception upon its own merits, apart
from favour or support by other arguments. Nor can it injure the cause
of morality to endeavour to lower the tone of the arrogant sophist, and
to teach him that modesty and moderation which are the properties of a
belief that brings calm and content into the mind, without prescribing
to it an unworthy subjection. I maintain, then, that the
physico-theological argument is insufficient of itself to prove the
existence of a Supreme Being, that it must entrust this to the
ontological argument—to which it serves merely as an introduction, and
that, consequently, this argument contains the only possible ground of
proof (possessed by speculative reason) for the existence of this
being.

The chief momenta in the physico-theological argument are as follow: 1.
We observe in the world manifest signs of an arrangement full of
purpose, executed with great wisdom, and argument in whole of a content
indescribably various, and of an extent without limits. 2. This
arrangement of means and ends is entirely foreign to the things
existing in the world—it belongs to them merely as a contingent
attribute; in other words, the nature of different things could not of
itself, whatever means were employed, harmoniously tend towards certain
purposes, were they not chosen and directed for these purposes by a
rational and disposing principle, in accordance with certain
fundamental ideas. 3. There exists, therefore, a sublime and wise cause
(or several), which is not merely a blind, all-powerful nature,
producing the beings and events which fill the world in unconscious
fecundity, but a free and intelligent cause of the world. 4. The unity
of this cause may be inferred from the unity of the reciprocal relation
existing between the parts of the world, as portions of an artistic
edifice—an inference which all our observation favours, and all
principles of analogy support.

In the above argument, it is inferred from the analogy of certain
products of nature with those of human art, when it compels Nature to
bend herself to its purposes, as in the case of a house, a ship, or a
watch, that the same kind of causality—namely, understanding and
will—resides in nature. It is also declared that the internal
possibility of this freely-acting nature (which is the source of all
art, and perhaps also of human reason) is derivable from another and
superhuman art—a conclusion which would perhaps be found incapable of
standing the test of subtle transcendental criticism. But to neither of
these opinions shall we at present object. We shall only remark that it
must be confessed that, if we are to discuss the subject of cause at
all, we cannot proceed more securely than with the guidance of the
analogy subsisting between nature and such products of design—these
being the only products whose causes and modes of organization are
completely known to us. Reason would be unable to satisfy her own
requirements, if she passed from a causality which she does know, to
obscure and indemonstrable principles of explanation which she does not
know.

According to the physico-theological argument, the connection and
harmony existing in the world evidence the contingency of the form
merely, but not of the matter, that is, of the substance of the world.
To establish the truth of the latter opinion, it would be necessary to
prove that all things would be in themselves incapable of this harmony
and order, unless they were, even as regards their substance, the
product of a supreme wisdom. But this would require very different
grounds of proof from those presented by the analogy with human art.
This proof can at most, therefore, demonstrate the existence of an
architect of the world, whose efforts are limited by the capabilities
of the material with which he works, but not of a creator of the world,
to whom all things are subject. Thus this argument is utterly
insufficient for the task before us—a demonstration of the existence of
an all-sufficient being. If we wish to prove the contingency of matter,
we must have recourse to a transcendental argument, which the
physico-theological was constructed expressly to avoid.

We infer, from the order and design visible in the universe, as a
disposition of a thoroughly contingent character, the existence of a
cause proportionate thereto. The conception of this cause must contain
certain determinate qualities, and it must therefore be regarded as the
conception of a being which possesses all power, wisdom, and so on, in
one word, all perfection—the conception, that is, of an all-sufficient
being. For the predicates of very great, astonishing, or immeasurable
power and excellence, give us no determinate conception of the thing,
nor do they inform us what the thing may be in itself. They merely
indicate the relation existing between the magnitude of the object and
the observer, who compares it with himself and with his own power of
comprehension, and are mere expressions of praise and reverence, by
which the object is either magnified, or the observing subject
depreciated in relation to the object. Where we have to do with the
magnitude (of the perfection) of a thing, we can discover no
determinate conception, except that which comprehends all possible
perfection or completeness, and it is only the total (omnitudo) of
reality which is completely determined in and through its conception
alone.

Now it cannot be expected that any one will be bold enough to declare
that he has a perfect insight into the relation which the magnitude of
the world he contemplates bears (in its extent as well as in its
content) to omnipotence, into that of the order and design in the world
to the highest wisdom, and that of the unity of the world to the
absolute unity of a Supreme Being. Physico-theology is therefore
incapable of presenting a determinate conception of a supreme cause of
the world, and is therefore insufficient as a principle of theology—a
theology which is itself to be the basis of religion.

The attainment of absolute totality is completely impossible on the
path of empiricism. And yet this is the path pursued in the
physico-theological argument. What means shall we employ to bridge the
abyss?

After elevating ourselves to admiration of the magnitude of the power,
wisdom, and other attributes of the author of the world, and finding we
can advance no further, we leave the argument on empirical grounds, and
proceed to infer the contingency of the world from the order and
conformity to aims that are observable in it. From this contingency we
infer, by the help of transcendental conceptions alone, the existence
of something absolutely necessary; and, still advancing, proceed from
the conception of the absolute necessity of the first cause to the
completely determined or determining conception thereof—the conception
of an all-embracing reality. Thus the physico-theological, failing in
its undertaking, recurs in its embarrassment to the cosmological
argument; and, as this is merely the ontological argument in disguise,
it executes its design solely by the aid of pure reason, although it at
first professed to have no connection with this faculty and to base its
entire procedure upon experience alone.

The physico-theologians have therefore no reason to regard with such
contempt the transcendental mode of argument, and to look down upon it,
with the conceit of clear-sighted observers of nature, as the
brain-cobweb of obscure speculatists. For, if they reflect upon and
examine their own arguments, they will find that, after following for
some time the path of nature and experience, and discovering themselves
no nearer their object, they suddenly leave this path and pass into the
region of pure possibility, where they hope to reach upon the wings of
ideas what had eluded all their empirical investigations. Gaining, as
they think, a firm footing after this immense leap, they extend their
determinate conception—into the possession of which they have come,
they know not how—over the whole sphere of creation, and explain their
ideal, which is entirely a product of pure reason, by illustrations
drawn from experience—though in a degree miserably unworthy of the
grandeur of the object, while they refuse to acknowledge that they have
arrived at this cognition or hypothesis by a very different road from
that of experience.

Thus the physico-theological is based upon the cosmological, and this
upon the ontological proof of the existence of a Supreme Being; and as
besides these three there is no other path open to speculative reason,
the ontological proof, on the ground of pure conceptions of reason, is
the only possible one, if any proof of a proposition so far
transcending the empirical exercise of the understanding is possible at
all.

Section VII. Critique of all Theology based upon Speculative Principles
of Reason

If by the term theology I understand the cognition of a primal being,
that cognition is based either upon reason alone (theologia rationalis)
or upon revelation (theologia revelata). The former cogitates its
object either by means of pure transcendental conceptions, as an ens
originarium, realissimum, ens entium, and is termed transcendental
theology; or, by means of a conception derived from the nature of our
own mind, as a supreme intelligence, and must then be entitled natural
theology. The person who believes in a transcendental theology alone,
is termed a deist; he who acknowledges the possibility of a natural
theology also, a theist. The former admits that we can cognize by pure
reason alone the existence of a Supreme Being, but at the same time
maintains that our conception of this being is purely transcendental,
and that all we can say of it is that it possesses all reality, without
being able to define it more closely. The second asserts that reason is
capable of presenting us, from the analogy with nature, with a more
definite conception of this being, and that its operations, as the
cause of all things, are the results of intelligence and free will. The
former regards the Supreme Being as the cause of the world—whether by
the necessity of his nature, or as a free agent, is left undetermined;
the latter considers this being as the author of the world.

Transcendental theology aims either at inferring the existence of a
Supreme Being from a general experience, without any closer reference
to the world to which this experience belongs, and in this case it is
called cosmotheology; or it endeavours to cognize the existence of such
a being, through mere conceptions, without the aid of experience, and
is then termed ontotheology.

Natural theology infers the attributes and the existence of an author
of the world, from the constitution of, the order and unity observable
in, the world, in which two modes of causality must be admitted to
exist—those of nature and freedom. Thus it rises from this world to a
supreme intelligence, either as the principle of all natural, or of all
moral order and perfection. In the former case it is termed
physico-theology, in the latter, ethical or moral-theology.[69]

 [69] Not theological ethics; for this science contains ethical laws,
 which presuppose the existence of a Supreme Governor of the world;
 while moral-theology, on the contrary, is the expression of a
 conviction of the existence of a Supreme Being, founded upon ethical
 laws.

As we are wont to understand by the term God not merely an eternal
nature, the operations of which are insensate and blind, but a Supreme
Being, who is the free and intelligent author of all things, and as it
is this latter view alone that can be of interest to humanity, we
might, in strict rigour, deny to the deist any belief in God at all,
and regard him merely as a maintainer of the existence of a primal
being or thing—the supreme cause of all other things. But, as no one
ought to be blamed, merely because he does not feel himself justified
in maintaining a certain opinion, as if he altogether denied its truth
and asserted the opposite, it is more correct—as it is less harsh—to
say, the deist believes in a God, the theist in a living God (summa
intelligentia). We shall now proceed to investigate the sources of all
these attempts of reason to establish the existence of a Supreme Being.

It may be sufficient in this place to define theoretical knowledge or
cognition as knowledge of that which is, and practical knowledge as
knowledge of that which ought to be. In this view, the theoretical
employment of reason is that by which I cognize à priori (as necessary)
that something is, while the practical is that by which I cognize à
priori what ought to happen. Now, if it is an indubitably certain,
though at the same time an entirely conditioned truth, that something
is, or ought to happen, either a certain determinate condition of this
truth is absolutely necessary, or such a condition may be arbitrarily
presupposed. In the former case the condition is postulated (per
thesin), in the latter supposed (per hypothesin). There are certain
practical laws—those of morality—which are absolutely necessary. Now,
if these laws necessarily presuppose the existence of some being, as
the condition of the possibility of their obligatory power, this being
must be postulated, because the conditioned, from which we reason to
this determinate condition, is itself cognized à priori as absolutely
necessary. We shall at some future time show that the moral laws not
merely presuppose the existence of a Supreme Being, but also, as
themselves absolutely necessary in a different relation, demand or
postulate it—although only from a practical point of view. The
discussion of this argument we postpone for the present.

When the question relates merely to that which is, not to that which
ought to be, the conditioned which is presented in experience is always
cogitated as contingent. For this reason its condition cannot be
regarded as absolutely necessary, but merely as relatively necessary,
or rather as needful; the condition is in itself and à priori a mere
arbitrary presupposition in aid of the cognition, by reason, of the
conditioned. If, then, we are to possess a theoretical cognition of the
absolute necessity of a thing, we cannot attain to this cognition
otherwise than à priori by means of conceptions; while it is impossible
in this way to cognize the existence of a cause which bears any
relation to an existence given in experience.

Theoretical cognition is speculative when it relates to an object or
certain conceptions of an object which is not given and cannot be
discovered by means of experience. It is opposed to the cognition of
nature, which concerns only those objects or predicates which can be
presented in a possible experience.

The principle that everything which happens (the empirically
contingent) must have a cause, is a principle of the cognition of
nature, but not of speculative cognition. For, if we change it into an
abstract principle, and deprive it of its reference to experience and
the empirical, we shall find that it cannot with justice be regarded
any longer as a synthetical proposition, and that it is impossible to
discover any mode of transition from that which exists to something
entirely different—termed cause. Nay, more, the conception of a cause
likewise that of the contingent—loses, in this speculative mode of
employing it, all significance, for its objective reality and meaning
are comprehensible from experience alone.

When from the existence of the universe and the things in it the
existence of a cause of the universe is inferred, reason is proceeding
not in the natural, but in the speculative method. For the principle of
the former enounces, not that things themselves or substances, but only
that which happens or their states—as empirically contingent, have a
cause: the assertion that the existence of substance itself is
contingent is not justified by experience, it is the assertion of a
reason employing its principles in a speculative manner. If, again, I
infer from the form of the universe, from the way in which all things
are connected and act and react upon each other, the existence of a
cause entirely distinct from the universe—this would again be a
judgement of purely speculative reason; because the object in this
case—the cause—can never be an object of possible experience. In both
these cases the principle of causality, which is valid only in the
field of experience—useless and even meaningless beyond this region,
would be diverted from its proper destination.

Now I maintain that all attempts of reason to establish a theology by
the aid of speculation alone are fruitless, that the principles of
reason as applied to nature do not conduct us to any theological
truths, and, consequently, that a rational theology can have no
existence, unless it is founded upon the laws of morality. For all
synthetical principles of the understanding are valid only as immanent
in experience; while the cognition of a Supreme Being necessitates
their being employed transcendentally, and of this the understanding is
quite incapable. If the empirical law of causality is to conduct us to
a Supreme Being, this being must belong to the chain of empirical
objects—in which case it would be, like all phenomena, itself
conditioned. If the possibility of passing the limits of experience be
admitted, by means of the dynamical law of the relation of an effect to
its cause, what kind of conception shall we obtain by this procedure?
Certainly not the conception of a Supreme Being, because experience
never presents us with the greatest of all possible effects, and it is
only an effect of this character that could witness to the existence of
a corresponding cause. If, for the purpose of fully satisfying the
requirements of Reason, we recognize her right to assert the existence
of a perfect and absolutely necessary being, this can be admitted only
from favour, and cannot be regarded as the result of irresistible
demonstration. The physico-theological proof may add weight to
others—if other proofs there are—by connecting speculation with
experience; but in itself it rather prepares the mind for theological
cognition, and gives it a right and natural direction, than establishes
a sure foundation for theology.

It is now perfectly evident that transcendental questions admit only of
transcendental answers—those presented à priori by pure conceptions
without the least empirical admixture. But the question in the present
case is evidently synthetical—it aims at the extension of our cognition
beyond the bounds of experience—it requires an assurance respecting the
existence of a being corresponding with the idea in our minds, to which
no experience can ever be adequate. Now it has been abundantly proved
that all à priori synthetical cognition is possible only as the
expression of the formal conditions of a possible experience; and that
the validity of all principles depends upon their immanence in the
field of experience, that is, their relation to objects of empirical
cognition or phenomena. Thus all transcendental procedure in reference
to speculative theology is without result.

If any one prefers doubting the conclusiveness of the proofs of our
analytic to losing the persuasion of the validity of these old and time
honoured arguments, he at least cannot decline answering the
question—how he can pass the limits of all possible experience by the
help of mere ideas. If he talks of new arguments, or of improvements
upon old arguments, I request him to spare me. There is certainly no
great choice in this sphere of discussion, as all speculative arguments
must at last look for support to the ontological, and I have,
therefore, very little to fear from the argumentative fecundity of the
dogmatical defenders of a non-sensuous reason. Without looking upon
myself as a remarkably combative person, I shall not decline the
challenge to detect the fallacy and destroy the pretensions of every
attempt of speculative theology. And yet the hope of better fortune
never deserts those who are accustomed to the dogmatical mode of
procedure. I shall, therefore, restrict myself to the simple and
equitable demand that such reasoners will demonstrate, from the nature
of the human mind as well as from that of the other sources of
knowledge, how we are to proceed to extend our cognition completely à
priori, and to carry it to that point where experience abandons us, and
no means exist of guaranteeing the objective reality of our
conceptions. In whatever way the understanding may have attained to a
conception, the existence of the object of the conception cannot be
discovered in it by analysis, because the cognition of the existence of
the object depends upon the object’s being posited and given in itself
apart from the conception. But it is utterly impossible to go beyond
our conception, without the aid of experience—which presents to the
mind nothing but phenomena, or to attain by the help of mere
conceptions to a conviction of the existence of new kinds of objects or
supernatural beings.

But although pure speculative reason is far from sufficient to
demonstrate the existence of a Supreme Being, it is of the highest
utility in correcting our conception of this being—on the supposition
that we can attain to the cognition of it by some other means—in making
it consistent with itself and with all other conceptions of
intelligible objects, clearing it from all that is incompatible with
the conception of an ens summun, and eliminating from it all
limitations or admixtures of empirical elements.

Transcendental theology is still therefore, notwithstanding its
objective insufficiency, of importance in a negative respect; it is
useful as a test of the procedure of reason when engaged with pure
ideas, no other than a transcendental standard being in this case
admissible. For if, from a practical point of view, the hypothesis of a
Supreme and All-sufficient Being is to maintain its validity without
opposition, it must be of the highest importance to define this
conception in a correct and rigorous manner—as the transcendental
conception of a necessary being, to eliminate all phenomenal elements
(anthropomorphism in its most extended signification), and at the same
time to overflow all contradictory assertions—be they atheistic,
deistic, or anthropomorphic. This is of course very easy; as the same
arguments which demonstrated the inability of human reason to affirm
the existence of a Supreme Being must be alike sufficient to prove the
invalidity of its denial. For it is impossible to gain from the pure
speculation of reason demonstration that there exists no Supreme Being,
as the ground of all that exists, or that this being possesses none of
those properties which we regard as analogical with the dynamical
qualities of a thinking being, or that, as the anthropomorphists would
have us believe, it is subject to all the limitations which sensibility
imposes upon those intelligences which exist in the world of
experience.

A Supreme Being is, therefore, for the speculative reason, a mere
ideal, though a faultless one—a conception which perfects and crowns
the system of human cognition, but the objective reality of which can
neither be proved nor disproved by pure reason. If this defect is ever
supplied by a moral theology, the problematic transcendental theology
which has preceded, will have been at least serviceable as
demonstrating the mental necessity existing for the conception, by the
complete determination of it which it has furnished, and the ceaseless
testing of the conclusions of a reason often deceived by sense, and not
always in harmony with its own ideas. The attributes of necessity,
infinitude, unity, existence apart from the world (and not as a world
soul), eternity (free from conditions of time), omnipresence (free from
conditions of space), omnipotence, and others, are pure transcendental
predicates; and thus the accurate conception of a Supreme Being, which
every theology requires, is furnished by transcendental theology alone.

APPENDIX. Of the Regulative Employment of the Ideas of Pure Reason

The result of all the dialectical attempts of pure reason not only
confirms the truth of what we have already proved in our Transcendental
Analytic, namely, that all inferences which would lead us beyond the
limits of experience are fallacious and groundless, but it at the same
time teaches us this important lesson, that human reason has a natural
inclination to overstep these limits, and that transcendental ideas are
as much the natural property of the reason as categories are of the
understanding. There exists this difference, however, that while the
categories never mislead us, outward objects being always in perfect
harmony therewith, ideas are the parents of irresistible illusions, the
severest and most subtle criticism being required to save us from the
fallacies which they induce.

Whatever is grounded in the nature of our powers will be found to be in
harmony with the final purpose and proper employment of these powers,
when once we have discovered their true direction and aim. We are
entitled to suppose, therefore, that there exists a mode of employing
transcendental ideas which is proper and immanent; although, when we
mistake their meaning, and regard them as conceptions of actual things,
their mode of application is transcendent and delusive. For it is not
the idea itself, but only the employment of the idea in relation to
possible experience, that is transcendent or immanent. An idea is
employed transcendently, when it is applied to an object falsely
believed to be adequate with and to correspond to it; immanently, when
it is applied solely to the employment of the understanding in the
sphere of experience. Thus all errors of subreptio—of misapplication,
are to be ascribed to defects of judgement, and not to understanding or
reason.

Reason never has an immediate relation to an object; it relates
immediately to the understanding alone. It is only through the
understanding that it can be employed in the field of experience. It
does not form conceptions of objects, it merely arranges them and gives
to them that unity which they are capable of possessing when the sphere
of their application has been extended as widely as possible. Reason
avails itself of the conception of the understanding for the sole
purpose of producing totality in the different series. This totality
the understanding does not concern itself with; its only occupation is
the connection of experiences, by which series of conditions in
accordance with conceptions are established. The object of reason is,
therefore, the understanding and its proper destination. As the latter
brings unity into the diversity of objects by means of its conceptions,
so the former brings unity into the diversity of conceptions by means
of ideas; as it sets the final aim of a collective unity to the
operations of the understanding, which without this occupies itself
with a distributive unity alone.

I accordingly maintain that transcendental ideas can never be employed
as constitutive ideas, that they cannot be conceptions of objects, and
that, when thus considered, they assume a fallacious and dialectical
character. But, on the other hand, they are capable of an admirable and
indispensably necessary application to objects—as regulative ideas,
directing the understanding to a certain aim, the guiding lines towards
which all its laws follow, and in which they all meet in one point.
This point—though a mere idea (focus imaginarius), that is, not a point
from which the conceptions of the understanding do really proceed, for
it lies beyond the sphere of possible experience—serves,
notwithstanding, to give to these conceptions the greatest possible
unity combined with the greatest possible extension. Hence arises the
natural illusion which induces us to believe that these lines proceed
from an object which lies out of the sphere of empirical cognition,
just as objects reflected in a mirror appear to be behind it. But this
illusion—which we may hinder from imposing upon us—is necessary and
unavoidable, if we desire to see, not only those objects which lie
before us, but those which are at a great distance behind us; that is
to say, when, in the present case, we direct the aims of the
understanding, beyond every given experience, towards an extension as
great as can possibly be attained.

If we review our cognitions in their entire extent, we shall find that
the peculiar business of reason is to arrange them into a system, that
is to say, to give them connection according to a principle. This unity
presupposes an idea—the idea of the form of a whole (of cognition),
preceding the determinate cognition of the parts, and containing the
conditions which determine à priori to every part its place and
relation to the other parts of the whole system. This idea,
accordingly, demands complete unity in the cognition of the
understanding—not the unity of a contingent aggregate, but that of a
system connected according to necessary laws. It cannot be affirmed
with propriety that this idea is a conception of an object; it is
merely a conception of the complete unity of the conceptions of
objects, in so far as this unity is available to the understanding as a
rule. Such conceptions of reason are not derived from nature; on the
contrary, we employ them for the interrogation and investigation of
nature, and regard our cognition as defective so long as it is not
adequate to them. We admit that such a thing as pure earth, pure water,
or pure air, is not to be discovered. And yet we require these
conceptions (which have their origin in the reason, so far as regards
their absolute purity and completeness) for the purpose of determining
the share which each of these natural causes has in every phenomenon.
Thus the different kinds of matter are all referred to earths, as mere
weight; to salts and inflammable bodies, as pure force; and finally, to
water and air, as the vehicula of the former, or the machines employed
by them in their operations—for the purpose of explaining the chemical
action and reaction of bodies in accordance with the idea of a
mechanism. For, although not actually so expressed, the influence of
such ideas of reason is very observable in the procedure of natural
philosophers.

If reason is the faculty of deducing the particular from the general,
and if the general be certain in se and given, it is only necessary
that the judgement should subsume the particular under the general, the
particular being thus necessarily determined. I shall term this the
demonstrative or apodeictic employment of reason. If, however, the
general is admitted as problematical only, and is a mere idea, the
particular case is certain, but the universality of the rule which
applies to this particular case remains a problem. Several particular
cases, the certainty of which is beyond doubt, are then taken and
examined, for the purpose of discovering whether the rule is applicable
to them; and if it appears that all the particular cases which can be
collected follow from the rule, its universality is inferred, and at
the same time, all the causes which have not, or cannot be presented to
our observation, are concluded to be of the same character with those
which we have observed. This I shall term the hypothetical employment
of the reason.

The hypothetical exercise of reason by the aid of ideas employed as
problematical conceptions is properly not constitutive. That is to say,
if we consider the subject strictly, the truth of the rule, which has
been employed as an hypothesis, does not follow from the use that is
made of it by reason. For how can we know all the possible cases that
may arise? some of which may, however, prove exceptions to the
universality of the rule. This employment of reason is merely
regulative, and its sole aim is the introduction of unity into the
aggregate of our particular cognitions, and thereby the approximating
of the rule to universality.

The object of the hypothetical employment of reason is therefore the
systematic unity of cognitions; and this unity is the criterion of the
truth of a rule. On the other hand, this systematic unity—as a mere
idea—is in fact merely a unity projected, not to be regarded as given,
but only in the light of a problem—a problem which serves, however, as
a principle for the various and particular exercise of the
understanding in experience, directs it with regard to those cases
which are not presented to our observation, and introduces harmony and
consistency into all its operations.

All that we can be certain of from the above considerations is that
this systematic unity is a logical principle, whose aim is to assist
the understanding, where it cannot of itself attain to rules, by means
of ideas, to bring all these various rules under one principle, and
thus to ensure the most complete consistency and connection that can be
attained. But the assertion that objects and the understanding by which
they are cognized are so constituted as to be determined to systematic
unity, that this may be postulated à priori, without any reference to
the interest of reason, and that we are justified in declaring all
possible cognitions—empirical and others—to possess systematic unity,
and to be subject to general principles from which, notwithstanding
their various character, they are all derivable,—such an assertion can
be founded only upon a transcendental principle of reason, which would
render this systematic unity not subjectively and logically—in its
character of a method, but objectively necessary.

We shall illustrate this by an example. The conceptions of the
understanding make us acquainted, among many other kinds of unity, with
that of the causality of a substance, which is termed power. The
different phenomenal manifestations of the same substance appear at
first view to be so very dissimilar that we are inclined to assume the
existence of just as many different powers as there are different
effects—as, in the case of the human mind, we have feeling,
consciousness, imagination, memory, wit, analysis, pleasure, desire and
so on. Now we are required by a logical maxim to reduce these
differences to as small a number as possible, by comparing them and
discovering the hidden identity which exists. We must inquire, for
example, whether or not imagination (connected with consciousness),
memory, wit, and analysis are not merely different forms of
understanding and reason. The idea of a fundamental power, the
existence of which no effort of logic can assure us of, is the problem
to be solved, for the systematic representation of the existing variety
of powers. The logical principle of reason requires us to produce as
great a unity as is possible in the system of our cognitions; and the
more the phenomena of this and the other power are found to be
identical, the more probable does it become, that they are nothing but
different manifestations of one and the same power, which may be
called, relatively speaking, a fundamental power. And so with other
cases.

These relatively fundamental powers must again be compared with each
other, to discover, if possible, the one radical and absolutely
fundamental power of which they are but the manifestations. But this
unity is purely hypothetical. It is not maintained, that this unity
does really exist, but that we must, in the interest of reason, that
is, for the establishment of principles for the various rules presented
by experience, try to discover and introduce it, so far as is
practicable, into the sphere of our cognitions.

But the transcendental employment of the understanding would lead us to
believe that this idea of a fundamental power is not problematical, but
that it possesses objective reality, and thus the systematic unity of
the various powers or forces in a substance is demanded by the
understanding and erected into an apodeictic or necessary principle.
For, without having attempted to discover the unity of the various
powers existing in nature, nay, even after all our attempts have
failed, we notwithstanding presuppose that it does exist, and may be,
sooner or later, discovered. And this reason does, not only, as in the
case above adduced, with regard to the unity of substance, but where
many substances, although all to a certain extent homogeneous, are
discoverable, as in the case of matter in general. Here also does
reason presuppose the existence of the systematic unity of various
powers—inasmuch as particular laws of nature are subordinate to general
laws; and parsimony in principles is not merely an economical principle
of reason, but an essential law of nature.

We cannot understand, in fact, how a logical principle of unity can of
right exist, unless we presuppose a transcendental principle, by which
such a systematic unit—as a property of objects themselves—is regarded
as necessary à priori. For with what right can reason, in its logical
exercise, require us to regard the variety of forces which nature
displays, as in effect a disguised unity, and to deduce them from one
fundamental force or power, when she is free to admit that it is just
as possible that all forces should be different in kind, and that a
systematic unity is not conformable to the design of nature? In this
view of the case, reason would be proceeding in direct opposition to
her own destination, by setting as an aim an idea which entirely
conflicts with the procedure and arrangement of nature. Neither can we
assert that reason has previously inferred this unity from the
contingent nature of phenomena. For the law of reason which requires us
to seek for this unity is a necessary law, inasmuch as without it we
should not possess a faculty of reason, nor without reason a consistent
and self-accordant mode of employing the understanding, nor, in the
absence of this, any proper and sufficient criterion of empirical
truth. In relation to this criterion, therefore, we must suppose the
idea of the systematic unity of nature to possess objective validity
and necessity.

We find this transcendental presupposition lurking in different forms
in the principles of philosophers, although they have neither
recognized it nor confessed to themselves its presence. That the
diversities of individual things do not exclude identity of species,
that the various species must be considered as merely different
determinations of a few genera, and these again as divisions of still
higher races, and so on—that, accordingly, a certain systematic unity
of all possible empirical conceptions, in so far as they can be deduced
from higher and more general conceptions, must be sought for, is a
scholastic maxim or logical principle, without which reason could not
be employed by us. For we can infer the particular from the general,
only in so far as general properties of things constitute the
foundation upon which the particular rest.

That the same unity exists in nature is presupposed by philosophers in
the well-known scholastic maxim, which forbids us unnecessarily to
augment the number of entities or principles (entia praeter
necessitatem non esse multiplicanda). This maxim asserts that nature
herself assists in the establishment of this unity of reason, and that
the seemingly infinite diversity of phenomena should not deter us from
the expectation of discovering beneath this diversity a unity of
fundamental properties, of which the aforesaid variety is but a more or
less determined form. This unity, although a mere idea, thinkers have
found it necessary rather to moderate the desire than to encourage it.
It was considered a great step when chemists were able to reduce all
salts to two main genera—acids and alkalis; and they regard this
difference as itself a mere variety, or different manifestation of one
and the same fundamental material. The different kinds of earths
(stones and even metals) chemists have endeavoured to reduce to three,
and afterwards to two; but still, not content with this advance, they
cannot but think that behind these diversities there lurks but one
genus—nay, that even salts and earths have a common principle. It might
be conjectured that this is merely an economical plan of reason, for
the purpose of sparing itself trouble, and an attempt of a purely
hypothetical character, which, when successful, gives an appearance of
probability to the principle of explanation employed by the reason. But
a selfish purpose of this kind is easily to be distinguished from the
idea, according to which every one presupposes that this unity is in
accordance with the laws of nature, and that reason does not in this
case request, but requires, although we are quite unable to determine
the proper limits of this unity.

If the diversity existing in phenomena—a diversity not of form (for in
this they may be similar) but of content—were so great that the
subtlest human reason could never by comparison discover in them the
least similarity (which is not impossible), in this case the logical
law of genera would be without foundation, the conception of a genus,
nay, all general conceptions would be impossible, and the faculty of
the understanding, the exercise of which is restricted to the world of
conceptions, could not exist. The logical principle of genera,
accordingly, if it is to be applied to nature (by which I mean objects
presented to our senses), presupposes a transcendental principle. In
accordance with this principle, homogeneity is necessarily presupposed
in the variety of phenomena (although we are unable to determine à
priori the degree of this homogeneity), because without it no empirical
conceptions, and consequently no experience, would be possible.

The logical principle of genera, which demands identity in phenomena,
is balanced by another principle—that of species, which requires
variety and diversity in things, notwithstanding their accordance in
the same genus, and directs the understanding to attend to the one no
less than to the other. This principle (of the faculty of distinction)
acts as a check upon the reason and reason exhibits in this respect a
double and conflicting interest—on the one hand, the interest in the
extent (the interest of generality) in relation to genera; on the
other, that of the content (the interest of individuality) in relation
to the variety of species. In the former case, the understanding
cogitates more under its conceptions, in the latter it cogitates more
in them. This distinction manifests itself likewise in the habits of
thought peculiar to natural philosophers, some of whom—the remarkably
speculative heads—may be said to be hostile to heterogeneity in
phenomena, and have their eyes always fixed on the unity of genera,
while others—with a strong empirical tendency—aim unceasingly at the
analysis of phenomena, and almost destroy in us the hope of ever being
able to estimate the character of these according to general
principles.

The latter mode of thought is evidently based upon a logical principle,
the aim of which is the systematic completeness of all cognitions. This
principle authorizes me, beginning at the genus, to descend to the
various and diverse contained under it; and in this way extension, as
in the former case unity, is assured to the system. For if we merely
examine the sphere of the conception which indicates a genus, we cannot
discover how far it is possible to proceed in the division of that
sphere; just as it is impossible, from the consideration of the space
occupied by matter, to determine how far we can proceed in the division
of it. Hence every genus must contain different species, and these
again different subspecies; and as each of the latter must itself
contain a sphere (must be of a certain extent, as a conceptus
communis), reason demands that no species or sub-species is to be
considered as the lowest possible. For a species or sub-species, being
always a conception, which contains only what is common to a number of
different things, does not completely determine any individual thing,
or relate immediately to it, and must consequently contain other
conceptions, that is, other sub-species under it. This law of
specification may be thus expressed: entium varietates non temere sunt
minuendae.

But it is easy to see that this logical law would likewise be without
sense or application, were it not based upon a transcendental law of
specification, which certainly does not require that the differences
existing in phenomena should be infinite in number, for the logical
principle, which merely maintains the indeterminateness of the logical
sphere of a conception, in relation to its possible division, does not
authorize this statement; while it does impose upon the understanding
the duty of searching for subspecies to every species, and minor
differences in every difference. For, were there no lower conceptions,
neither could there be any higher. Now the understanding cognizes only
by means of conceptions; consequently, how far soever it may proceed in
division, never by mere intuition, but always by lower and lower
conceptions. The cognition of phenomena in their complete determination
(which is possible only by means of the understanding) requires an
unceasingly continued specification of conceptions, and a progression
to ever smaller differences, of which abstraction had been made in the
conception of the species, and still more in that of the genus.

This law of specification cannot be deduced from experience; it can
never present us with a principle of so universal an application.
Empirical specification very soon stops in its distinction of
diversities, and requires the guidance of the transcendental law, as a
principle of the reason—a law which imposes on us the necessity of
never ceasing in our search for differences, even although these may
not present themselves to the senses. That absorbent earths are of
different kinds could only be discovered by obeying the anticipatory
law of reason, which imposes upon the understanding the task of
discovering the differences existing between these earths, and supposes
that nature is richer in substances than our senses would indicate. The
faculty of the understanding belongs to us just as much under the
presupposition of differences in the objects of nature, as under the
condition that these objects are homogeneous, because we could not
possess conceptions, nor make any use of our understanding, were not
the phenomena included under these conceptions in some respects
dissimilar, as well as similar, in their character.

Reason thus prepares the sphere of the understanding for the operations
of this faculty: 1. By the principle of the homogeneity of the diverse
in higher genera; 2. By the principle of the variety of the homogeneous
in lower species; and, to complete the systematic unity, it adds, 3. A
law of the affinity of all conceptions which prescribes a continuous
transition from one species to every other by the gradual increase of
diversity. We may term these the principles of the homogeneity, the
specification, and the continuity of forms. The latter results from the
union of the two former, inasmuch as we regard the systematic
connection as complete in thought, in the ascent to higher genera, as
well as in the descent to lower species. For all diversities must be
related to each other, as they all spring from one highest genus,
descending through the different gradations of a more and more extended
determination.

We may illustrate the systematic unity produced by the three logical
principles in the following manner. Every conception may be regarded as
a point, which, as the standpoint of a spectator, has a certain
horizon, which may be said to enclose a number of things that may be
viewed, so to speak, from that centre. Within this horizon there must
be an infinite number of other points, each of which has its own
horizon, smaller and more circumscribed; in other words, every species
contains sub-species, according to the principle of specification, and
the logical horizon consists of smaller horizons (subspecies), but not
of points (individuals), which possess no extent. But different
horizons or genera, which include under them so many conceptions, may
have one common horizon, from which, as from a mid-point, they may be
surveyed; and we may proceed thus, till we arrive at the highest genus,
or universal and true horizon, which is determined by the highest
conception, and which contains under itself all differences and
varieties, as genera, species, and subspecies.

To this highest standpoint I am conducted by the law of homogeneity, as
to all lower and more variously-determined conceptions by the law of
specification. Now as in this way there exists no void in the whole
extent of all possible conceptions, and as out of the sphere of these
the mind can discover nothing, there arises from the presupposition of
the universal horizon above mentioned, and its complete division, the
principle: Non datur vacuum formarum. This principle asserts that there
are not different primitive and highest genera, which stand isolated,
so to speak, from each other, but all the various genera are mere
divisions and limitations of one highest and universal genus; and hence
follows immediately the principle: Datur continuum formarum. This
principle indicates that all differences of species limit each other,
and do not admit of transition from one to another by a saltus, but
only through smaller degrees of the difference between the one species
and the other. In one word, there are no species or sub-species which
(in the view of reason) are the nearest possible to each other;
intermediate species or sub-species being always possible, the
difference of which from each of the former is always smaller than the
difference existing between these.

The first law, therefore, directs us to avoid the notion that there
exist different primal genera, and enounces the fact of perfect
homogeneity; the second imposes a check upon this tendency to unity and
prescribes the distinction of sub-species, before proceeding to apply
our general conceptions to individuals. The third unites both the
former, by enouncing the fact of homogeneity as existing even in the
most various diversity, by means of the gradual transition from one
species to another. Thus it indicates a relationship between the
different branches or species, in so far as they all spring from the
same stem.

But this logical law of the continuum specierum (formarum logicarum)
presupposes a transcendental principle (lex continui in natura),
without which the understanding might be led into error, by following
the guidance of the former, and thus perhaps pursuing a path contrary
to that prescribed by nature. This law must, consequently, be based
upon pure transcendental, and not upon empirical, considerations. For,
in the latter case, it would come later than the system; whereas it is
really itself the parent of all that is systematic in our cognition of
nature. These principles are not mere hypotheses employed for the
purpose of experimenting upon nature; although when any such connection
is discovered, it forms a solid ground for regarding the hypothetical
unity as valid in the sphere of nature—and thus they are in this
respect not without their use. But we go farther, and maintain that it
is manifest that these principles of parsimony in fundamental causes,
variety in effects, and affinity in phenomena, are in accordance both
with reason and nature, and that they are not mere methods or plans
devised for the purpose of assisting us in our observation of the
external world.

But it is plain that this continuity of forms is a mere idea, to which
no adequate object can be discovered in experience. And this for two
reasons. First, because the species in nature are really divided, and
hence form quanta discreta; and, if the gradual progression through
their affinity were continuous, the intermediate members lying between
two given species must be infinite in number, which is impossible.
Secondly, because we cannot make any determinate empirical use of this
law, inasmuch as it does not present us with any criterion of affinity
which could aid us in determining how far we ought to pursue the
graduation of differences: it merely contains a general indication that
it is our duty to seek for and, if possible, to discover them.

When we arrange these principles of systematic unity in the order
conformable to their employment in experience, they will stand thus:
Variety, Affinity, Unity, each of them, as ideas, being taken in the
highest degree of their completeness. Reason presupposes the existence
of cognitions of the understanding, which have a direct relation to
experience, and aims at the ideal unity of these cognitions—a unity
which far transcends all experience or empirical notions. The affinity
of the diverse, notwithstanding the differences existing between its
parts, has a relation to things, but a still closer one to the mere
properties and powers of things. For example, imperfect experience may
represent the orbits of the planets as circular. But we discover
variations from this course, and we proceed to suppose that the planets
revolve in a path which, if not a circle, is of a character very
similar to it. That is to say, the movements of those planets which do
not form a circle will approximate more or less to the properties of a
circle, and probably form an ellipse. The paths of comets exhibit still
greater variations, for, so far as our observation extends, they do not
return upon their own course in a circle or ellipse. But we proceed to
the conjecture that comets describe a parabola, a figure which is
closely allied to the ellipse. In fact, a parabola is merely an
ellipse, with its longer axis produced to an indefinite extent. Thus
these principles conduct us to a unity in the genera of the forms of
these orbits, and, proceeding farther, to a unity as regards the cause
of the motions of the heavenly bodies—that is, gravitation. But we go
on extending our conquests over nature, and endeavour to explain all
seeming deviations from these rules, and even make additions to our
system which no experience can ever substantiate—for example, the
theory, in affinity with that of ellipses, of hyperbolic paths of
comets, pursuing which, these bodies leave our solar system and,
passing from sun to sun, unite the most distant parts of the infinite
universe, which is held together by the same moving power.

The most remarkable circumstance connected with these principles is
that they seem to be transcendental, and, although only containing
ideas for the guidance of the empirical exercise of reason, and
although this empirical employment stands to these ideas in an
asymptotic relation alone (to use a mathematical term), that is,
continually approximate, without ever being able to attain to them,
they possess, notwithstanding, as à priori synthetical propositions,
objective though undetermined validity, and are available as rules for
possible experience. In the elaboration of our experience, they may
also be employed with great advantage, as heuristic[70] principles. A
transcendental deduction of them cannot be made; such a deduction being
always impossible in the case of ideas, as has been already shown.

 [70] From the Greek, eurhioko.

We distinguished, in the Transcendental Analytic, the dynamical
principles of the understanding, which are regulative principles of
intuition, from the mathematical, which are constitutive principles of
intuition. These dynamical laws are, however, constitutive in relation
to experience, inasmuch as they render the conceptions without which
experience could not exist possible à priori. But the principles of
pure reason cannot be constitutive even in regard to empirical
conceptions, because no sensuous schema corresponding to them can be
discovered, and they cannot therefore have an object in concreto. Now,
if I grant that they cannot be employed in the sphere of experience, as
constitutive principles, how shall I secure for them employment and
objective validity as regulative principles, and in what way can they
be so employed?

The understanding is the object of reason, as sensibility is the object
of the understanding. The production of systematic unity in all the
empirical operations of the understanding is the proper occupation of
reason; just as it is the business of the understanding to connect the
various content of phenomena by means of conceptions, and subject them
to empirical laws. But the operations of the understanding are, without
the schemata of sensibility, undetermined; and, in the same manner, the
unity of reason is perfectly undetermined as regards the conditions
under which, and the extent to which, the understanding ought to carry
the systematic connection of its conceptions. But, although it is
impossible to discover in intuition a schema for the complete
systematic unity of all the conceptions of the understanding, there
must be some analogon of this schema. This analogon is the idea of the
maximum of the division and the connection of our cognition in one
principle. For we may have a determinate notion of a maximum and an
absolutely perfect, all the restrictive conditions which are connected
with an indeterminate and various content having been abstracted. Thus
the idea of reason is analogous with a sensuous schema, with this
difference, that the application of the categories to the schema of
reason does not present a cognition of any object (as is the case with
the application of the categories to sensuous schemata), but merely
provides us with a rule or principle for the systematic unity of the
exercise of the understanding. Now, as every principle which imposes
upon the exercise of the understanding à priori compliance with the
rule of systematic unity also relates, although only in an indirect
manner, to an object of experience, the principles of pure reason will
also possess objective reality and validity in relation to experience.
But they will not aim at determining our knowledge in regard to any
empirical object; they will merely indicate the procedure, following
which the empirical and determinate exercise of the understanding may
be in complete harmony and connection with itself—a result which is
produced by its being brought into harmony with the principle of
systematic unity, so far as that is possible, and deduced from it.

I term all subjective principles, which are not derived from
observation of the constitution of an object, but from the interest
which Reason has in producing a certain completeness in her cognition
of that object, maxims of reason. Thus there are maxims of speculative
reason, which are based solely upon its speculative interest, although
they appear to be objective principles.

When principles which are really regulative are regarded as
constitutive, and employed as objective principles, contradictions must
arise; but if they are considered as mere maxims, there is no room for
contradictions of any kind, as they then merely indicate the different
interests of reason, which occasion differences in the mode of thought.
In effect, Reason has only one single interest, and the seeming
contradiction existing between her maxims merely indicates a difference
in, and a reciprocal limitation of, the methods by which this interest
is satisfied.

This reasoner has at heart the interest of diversity—in accordance with
the principle of specification; another, the interest of unity—in
accordance with the principle of aggregation. Each believes that his
judgement rests upon a thorough insight into the subject he is
examining, and yet it has been influenced solely by a greater or less
degree of adherence to some one of the two principles, neither of which
are objective, but originate solely from the interest of reason, and on
this account to be termed maxims rather than principles. When I observe
intelligent men disputing about the distinctive characteristics of men,
animals, or plants, and even of minerals, those on the one side
assuming the existence of certain national characteristics, certain
well-defined and hereditary distinctions of family, race, and so on,
while the other side maintain that nature has endowed all races of men
with the same faculties and dispositions, and that all differences are
but the result of external and accidental circumstances—I have only to
consider for a moment the real nature of the subject of discussion, to
arrive at the conclusion that it is a subject far too deep for us to
judge of, and that there is little probability of either party being
able to speak from a perfect insight into and understanding of the
nature of the subject itself. Both have, in reality, been struggling
for the twofold interest of reason; the one maintaining the one
interest, the other the other. But this difference between the maxims
of diversity and unity may easily be reconciled and adjusted; although,
so long as they are regarded as objective principles, they must
occasion not only contradictions and polemic, but place hinderances in
the way of the advancement of truth, until some means is discovered of
reconciling these conflicting interests, and bringing reason into union
and harmony with itself.

The same is the case with the so-called law discovered by Leibnitz, and
supported with remarkable ability by Bonnet—the law of the continuous
gradation of created beings, which is nothing more than an inference
from the principle of affinity; for observation and study of the order
of nature could never present it to the mind as an objective truth. The
steps of this ladder, as they appear in experience, are too far apart
from each other, and the so-called petty differences between different
kinds of animals are in nature commonly so wide separations that no
confidence can be placed in such views (particularly when we reflect on
the great variety of things, and the ease with which we can discover
resemblances), and no faith in the laws which are said to express the
aims and purposes of nature. On the other hand, the method of
investigating the order of nature in the light of this principle, and
the maxim which requires us to regard this order—it being still
undetermined how far it extends—as really existing in nature, is beyond
doubt a legitimate and excellent principle of reason—a principle which
extends farther than any experience or observation of ours and which,
without giving us any positive knowledge of anything in the region of
experience, guides us to the goal of systematic unity.

_Of the Ultimate End of the Natural Dialectic of Human Reason._

The ideas of pure reason cannot be, of themselves and in their own
nature, dialectical; it is from their misemployment alone that
fallacies and illusions arise. For they originate in the nature of
reason itself, and it is impossible that this supreme tribunal for all
the rights and claims of speculation should be itself undeserving of
confidence and promotive of error. It is to be expected, therefore,
that these ideas have a genuine and legitimate aim. It is true, the mob
of sophists raise against reason the cry of inconsistency and
contradiction, and affect to despise the government of that faculty,
because they cannot understand its constitution, while it is to its
beneficial influences alone that they owe the position and the
intelligence which enable them to criticize and to blame its procedure.

We cannot employ an à priori conception with certainty, until we have
made a transcendental deduction therefore. The ideas of pure reason do
not admit of the same kind of deduction as the categories. But if they
are to possess the least objective validity, and to represent anything
but mere creations of thought (entia rationis ratiocinantis), a
deduction of them must be possible. This deduction will complete the
critical task imposed upon pure reason; and it is to this part Of our
labours that we now proceed.

There is a great difference between a thing’s being presented to the
mind as an object in an absolute sense, or merely as an ideal object.
In the former case I employ my conceptions to determine the object; in
the latter case nothing is present to the mind but a mere schema, which
does not relate directly to an object, not even in a hypothetical
sense, but which is useful only for the purpose of representing other
objects to the mind, in a mediate and indirect manner, by means of
their relation to the idea in the intellect. Thus I say the conception
of a supreme intelligence is a mere idea; that is to say, its objective
reality does not consist in the fact that it has an immediate relation
to an object (for in this sense we have no means of establishing its
objective validity), it is merely a schema constructed according to the
necessary conditions of the unity of reason—the schema of a thing in
general, which is useful towards the production of the highest degree
of systematic unity in the empirical exercise of reason, in which we
deduce this or that object of experience from the imaginary object of
this idea, as the ground or cause of the said object of experience. In
this way, the idea is properly a heuristic, and not an ostensive,
conception; it does not give us any information respecting the
constitution of an object, it merely indicates how, under the guidance
of the idea, we ought to investigate the constitution and the relations
of objects in the world of experience. Now, if it can be shown that the
three kinds of transcendental ideas (psychological, cosmological, and
theological), although not relating directly to any object nor
determining it, do nevertheless, on the supposition of the existence of
an ideal object, produce systematic unity in the laws of the empirical
employment of the reason, and extend our empirical cognition, without
ever being inconsistent or in opposition with it—it must be a necessary
maxim of reason to regulate its procedure according to these ideas. And
this forms the transcendental deduction of all speculative ideas, not
as constitutive principles of the extension of our cognition beyond the
limits of our experience, but as regulative principles of the
systematic unity of empirical cognition, which is by the aid of these
ideas arranged and emended within its own proper limits, to an extent
unattainable by the operation of the principles of the understanding
alone.

I shall make this plainer. Guided by the principles involved in these
ideas, we must, in the first place, so connect all the phenomena,
actions, and feelings of the mind, as if it were a simple substance,
which, endowed with personal identity, possesses a permanent existence
(in this life at least), while its states, among which those of the
body are to be included as external conditions, are in continual
change. Secondly, in cosmology, we must investigate the conditions of
all natural phenomena, internal as well as external, as if they
belonged to a chain infinite and without any prime or supreme member,
while we do not, on this account, deny the existence of intelligible
grounds of these phenomena, although we never employ them to explain
phenomena, for the simple reason that they are not objects of our
cognition. Thirdly, in the sphere of theology, we must regard the whole
system of possible experience as forming an absolute, but dependent and
sensuously-conditioned unity, and at the same time as based upon a
sole, supreme, and all-sufficient ground existing apart from the world
itself—a ground which is a self-subsistent, primeval and creative
reason, in relation to which we so employ our reason in the field of
experience, as if all objects drew their origin from that archetype of
all reason. In other words, we ought not to deduce the internal
phenomena of the mind from a simple thinking substance, but deduce them
from each other under the guidance of the regulative idea of a simple
being; we ought not to deduce the phenomena, order, and unity of the
universe from a supreme intelligence, but merely draw from this idea of
a supremely wise cause the rules which must guide reason in its
connection of causes and effects.

Now there is nothing to hinder us from admitting these ideas to possess
an objective and hyperbolic existence, except the cosmological ideas,
which lead reason into an antinomy: the psychological and theological
ideas are not antinomial. They contain no contradiction; and how, then,
can any one dispute their objective reality, since he who denies it
knows as little about their possibility as we who affirm? And yet, when
we wish to admit the existence of a thing, it is not sufficient to
convince ourselves that there is no positive obstacle in the way; for
it cannot be allowable to regard mere creations of thought, which
transcend, though they do not contradict, all our conceptions, as real
and determinate objects, solely upon the authority of a speculative
reason striving to compass its own aims. They cannot, therefore, be
admitted to be real in themselves; they can only possess a comparative
reality—that of a schema of the regulative principle of the systematic
unity of all cognition. They are to be regarded not as actual things,
but as in some measure analogous to them. We abstract from the object
of the idea all the conditions which limit the exercise of our
understanding, but which, on the other hand, are the sole conditions of
our possessing a determinate conception of any given thing. And thus we
cogitate a something, of the real nature of which we have not the least
conception, but which we represent to ourselves as standing in a
relation to the whole system of phenomena, analogous to that in which
phenomena stand to each other.

By admitting these ideal beings, we do not really extend our cognitions
beyond the objects of possible experience; we extend merely the
empirical unity of our experience, by the aid of systematic unity, the
schema of which is furnished by the idea, which is therefore valid—not
as a constitutive, but as a regulative principle. For although we posit
a thing corresponding to the idea—a something, an actual existence—we
do not on that account aim at the extension of our cognition by means
of transcendent conceptions. This existence is purely ideal, and not
objective; it is the mere expression of the systematic unity which is
to be the guide of reason in the field of experience. There are no
attempts made at deciding what the ground of this unity may be, or what
the real nature of this imaginary being.

Thus the transcendental and only determinate conception of God, which
is presented to us by speculative reason, is in the strictest sense
deistic. In other words, reason does not assure us of the objective
validity of the conception; it merely gives us the idea of something,
on which the supreme and necessary unity of all experience is based.
This something we cannot, following the analogy of a real substance,
cogitate otherwise than as the cause of all things operating in
accordance with rational laws, if we regard it as an individual object;
although we should rest contented with the idea alone as a regulative
principle of reason, and make no attempt at completing the sum of the
conditions imposed by thought. This attempt is, indeed, inconsistent
with the grand aim of complete systematic unity in the sphere of
cognition—a unity to which no bounds are set by reason.

Hence it happens that, admitting a divine being, I can have no
conception of the internal possibility of its perfection, or of the
necessity of its existence. The only advantage of this admission is
that it enables me to answer all other questions relating to the
contingent, and to give reason the most complete satisfaction as
regards the unity which it aims at attaining in the world of
experience. But I cannot satisfy reason with regard to this hypothesis
itself; and this proves that it is not its intelligence and insight
into the subject, but its speculative interest alone which induces it
to proceed from a point lying far beyond the sphere of our cognition,
for the purpose of being able to consider all objects as parts of a
systematic whole.

Here a distinction presents itself, in regard to the way in which we
may cogitate a presupposition—a distinction which is somewhat subtle,
but of great importance in transcendental philosophy. I may have
sufficient grounds to admit something, or the existence of something,
in a relative point of view (suppositio relativa), without being
justified in admitting it in an absolute sense (suppositio absoluta).
This distinction is undoubtedly requisite, in the case of a regulative
principle, the necessity of which we recognize, though we are ignorant
of the source and cause of that necessity, and which we assume to be
based upon some ultimate ground, for the purpose of being able to
cogitate the universality of the principle in a more determinate way.
For example, I cogitate the existence of a being corresponding to a
pure transcendental idea. But I cannot admit that this being exists
absolutely and in itself, because all of the conceptions by which I can
cogitate an object in a determinate manner fall short of assuring me of
its existence; nay, the conditions of the objective validity of my
conceptions are excluded by the idea—by the very fact of its being an
idea. The conceptions of reality, substance, causality, nay, even that
of necessity in existence, have no significance out of the sphere of
empirical cognition, and cannot, beyond that sphere, determine any
object. They may, accordingly, be employed to explain the possibility
of things in the world of sense, but they are utterly inadequate to
explain the possibility of the universe itself considered as a whole;
because in this case the ground of explanation must lie out of and
beyond the world, and cannot, therefore, be an object of possible
experience. Now, I may admit the existence of an incomprehensible being
of this nature—the object of a mere idea, relatively to the world of
sense; although I have no ground to admit its existence absolutely and
in itself. For if an idea (that of a systematic and complete unity, of
which I shall presently speak more particularly) lies at the foundation
of the most extended empirical employment of reason, and if this idea
cannot be adequately represented in concreto, although it is
indispensably necessary for the approximation of empirical unity to the
highest possible degree—I am not only authorized, but compelled, to
realize this idea, that is, to posit a real object corresponding
thereto. But I cannot profess to know this object; it is to me merely a
something, to which, as the ground of systematic unity in cognition, I
attribute such properties as are analogous to the conceptions employed
by the understanding in the sphere of experience. Following the analogy
of the notions of reality, substance, causality, and necessity, I
cogitate a being, which possesses all these attributes in the highest
degree; and, as this idea is the offspring of my reason alone, I
cogitate this being as self-subsistent reason, and as the cause of the
universe operating by means of ideas of the greatest possible harmony
and unity. Thus I abstract all conditions that would limit my idea,
solely for the purpose of rendering systematic unity possible in the
world of empirical diversity, and thus securing the widest possible
extension for the exercise of reason in that sphere. This I am enabled
to do, by regarding all connections and relations in the world of
sense, as if they were the dispositions of a supreme reason, of which
our reason is but a faint image. I then proceed to cogitate this
Supreme Being by conceptions which have, properly, no meaning or
application, except in the world of sense. But as I am authorized to
employ the transcendental hypothesis of such a being in a relative
respect alone, that is, as the substratum of the greatest possible
unity in experience—I may attribute to a being which I regard as
distinct from the world, such properties as belong solely to the sphere
of sense and experience. For I do not desire, and am not justified in
desiring, to cognize this object of my idea, as it exists in itself;
for I possess no conceptions sufficient for this task, those of
reality, substance, causality, nay, even that of necessity in
existence, losing all significance, and becoming merely the signs of
conceptions, without content and without applicability, when I attempt
to carry them beyond the limits of the world of sense. I cogitate
merely the relation of a perfectly unknown being to the greatest
possible systematic unity of experience, solely for the purpose of
employing it as the schema of the regulative principle which directs
reason in its empirical exercise.

It is evident, at the first view, that we cannot presuppose the reality
of this transcendental object, by means of the conceptions of reality,
substance, causality, and so on, because these conceptions cannot be
applied to anything that is distinct from the world of sense. Thus the
supposition of a Supreme Being or cause is purely relative; it is
cogitated only in behalf of the systematic unity of experience; such a
being is but a something, of whose existence in itself we have not the
least conception. Thus, too, it becomes sufficiently manifest why we
required the idea of a necessary being in relation to objects given by
sense, although we can never have the least conception of this being,
or of its absolute necessity.

And now we can clearly perceive the result of our transcendental
dialectic, and the proper aim of the ideas of pure reason—which become
dialectical solely from misunderstanding and inconsiderateness. Pure
reason is, in fact, occupied with itself, and not with any object.
Objects are not presented to it to be embraced in the unity of an
empirical conception; it is only the cognitions of the understanding
that are presented to it, for the purpose of receiving the unity of a
rational conception, that is, of being connected according to a
principle. The unity of reason is the unity of system; and this
systematic unity is not an objective principle, extending its dominion
over objects, but a subjective maxim, extending its authority over the
empirical cognition of objects. The systematic connection which reason
gives to the empirical employment of the understanding not only
advances the extension of that employment, but ensures its correctness,
and thus the principle of a systematic unity of this nature is also
objective, although only in an indefinite respect (principium vagum).
It is not, however, a constitutive principle, determining an object to
which it directly relates; it is merely a regulative principle or
maxim, advancing and strengthening the empirical exercise of reason, by
the opening up of new paths of which the understanding is ignorant,
while it never conflicts with the laws of its exercise in the sphere of
experience.

But reason cannot cogitate this systematic unity, without at the same
time cogitating an object of the idea—an object that cannot be
presented in any experience, which contains no concrete example of a
complete systematic unity. This being (ens rationis ratiocinatae) is
therefore a mere idea and is not assumed to be a thing which is real
absolutely and in itself. On the contrary, it forms merely the
problematical foundation of the connection which the mind introduces
among the phenomena of the sensuous world. We look upon this
connection, in the light of the above-mentioned idea, as if it drew its
origin from the supposed being which corresponds to the idea. And yet
all we aim at is the possession of this idea as a secure foundation for
the systematic unity of experience—a unity indispensable to reason,
advantageous to the understanding, and promotive of the interests of
empirical cognition.

We mistake the true meaning of this idea when we regard it as an
enouncement, or even as a hypothetical declaration of the existence of
a real thing, which we are to regard as the origin or ground of a
systematic constitution of the universe. On the contrary, it is left
completely undetermined what the nature or properties of this so-called
ground may be. The idea is merely to be adopted as a point of view,
from which this unity, so essential to reason and so beneficial to the
understanding, may be regarded as radiating. In one word, this
transcendental thing is merely the schema of a regulative principle, by
means of which Reason, so far as in her lies, extends the dominion of
systematic unity over the whole sphere of experience.

The first object of an idea of this kind is the ego, considered merely
as a thinking nature or soul. If I wish to investigate the properties
of a thinking being, I must interrogate experience. But I find that I
can apply none of the categories to this object, the schema of these
categories, which is the condition of their application, being given
only in sensuous intuition. But I cannot thus attain to the cognition
of a systematic unity of all the phenomena of the internal sense.
Instead, therefore, of an empirical conception of what the soul really
is, reason takes the conception of the empirical unity of all thought,
and, by cogitating this unity as unconditioned and primitive,
constructs the rational conception or idea of a simple substance which
is in itself unchangeable, possessing personal identity, and in
connection with other real things external to it; in one word, it
constructs the idea of a simple self-subsistent intelligence. But the
real aim of reason in this procedure is the attainment of principles of
systematic unity for the explanation of the phenomena of the soul. That
is, reason desires to be able to represent all the determinations of
the internal sense as existing in one subject, all powers as deduced
from one fundamental power, all changes as mere varieties in the
condition of a being which is permanent and always the same, and all
phenomena in space as entirely different in their nature from the
procedure of thought. Essential simplicity (with the other attributes
predicated of the ego) is regarded as the mere schema of this
regulative principle; it is not assumed that it is the actual ground of
the properties of the soul. For these properties may rest upon quite
different grounds, of which we are completely ignorant; just as the
above predicates could not give us any knowledge of the soul as it is
in itself, even if we regarded them as valid in respect of it, inasmuch
as they constitute a mere idea, which cannot be represented in
concreto. Nothing but good can result from a psychological idea of this
kind, if we only take proper care not to consider it as more than an
idea; that is, if we regard it as valid merely in relation to the
employment of reason, in the sphere of the phenomena of the soul. Under
the guidance of this idea, or principle, no empirical laws of corporeal
phenomena are called in to explain that which is a phenomenon of the
internal sense alone; no windy hypotheses of the generation,
annihilation, and palingenesis of souls are admitted. Thus the
consideration of this object of the internal sense is kept pure, and
unmixed with heterogeneous elements; while the investigation of reason
aims at reducing all the grounds of explanation employed in this sphere
of knowledge to a single principle. All this is best effected, nay,
cannot be effected otherwise than by means of such a schema, which
requires us to regard this ideal thing as an actual existence. The
psychological idea is, therefore, meaningless and inapplicable, except
as the schema of a regulative conception. For, if I ask whether the
soul is not really of a spiritual nature—it is a question which has no
meaning. From such a conception has been abstracted, not merely all
corporeal nature, but all nature, that is, all the predicates of a
possible experience; and consequently, all the conditions which enable
us to cogitate an object to this conception have disappeared. But, if
these conditions are absent, it is evident that the conception is
meaningless.

The second regulative idea of speculative reason is the conception of
the universe. For nature is properly the only object presented to us,
in regard to which reason requires regulative principles. Nature is
twofold—thinking and corporeal nature. To cogitate the latter in regard
to its internal possibility, that is, to determine the application of
the categories to it, no idea is required—no representation which
transcends experience. In this sphere, therefore, an idea is
impossible, sensuous intuition being our only guide; while, in the
sphere of psychology, we require the fundamental idea (I), which
contains à priori a certain form of thought namely, the unity of the
ego. Pure reason has, therefore, nothing left but nature in general,
and the completeness of conditions in nature in accordance with some
principle. The absolute totality of the series of these conditions is
an idea, which can never be fully realized in the empirical exercise of
reason, while it is serviceable as a rule for the procedure of reason
in relation to that totality. It requires us, in the explanation of
given phenomena (in the regress or ascent in the series), to proceed as
if the series were infinite in itself, that is, were prolonged in
indefinitum; while on the other hand, where reason is regarded as
itself the determining cause (in the region of freedom), we are
required to proceed as if we had not before us an object of sense, but
of the pure understanding. In this latter case, the conditions do not
exist in the series of phenomena, but may be placed quite out of and
beyond it, and the series of conditions may be regarded as if it had an
absolute beginning from an intelligible cause. All this proves that the
cosmological ideas are nothing but regulative principles, and not
constitutive; and that their aim is not to realize an actual totality
in such series. The full discussion of this subject will be found in
its proper place in the chapter on the antinomy of pure reason.

The third idea of pure reason, containing the hypothesis of a being
which is valid merely as a relative hypothesis, is that of the one and
all-sufficient cause of all cosmological series, in other words, the
idea of God. We have not the slightest ground absolutely to admit the
existence of an object corresponding to this idea; for what can empower
or authorize us to affirm the existence of a being of the highest
perfection—a being whose existence is absolutely necessary—merely
because we possess the conception of such a being? The answer is: It is
the existence of the world which renders this hypothesis necessary. But
this answer makes it perfectly evident that the idea of this being,
like all other speculative ideas, is essentially nothing more than a
demand upon reason that it shall regulate the connection which it and
its subordinate faculties introduce into the phenomena of the world by
principles of systematic unity and, consequently, that it shall regard
all phenomena as originating from one all-embracing being, as the
supreme and all-sufficient cause. From this it is plain that the only
aim of reason in this procedure is the establishment of its own formal
rule for the extension of its dominion in the world of experience; that
it does not aim at an extension of its cognition beyond the limits of
experience; and that, consequently, this idea does not contain any
constitutive principle.

The highest formal unity, which is based upon ideas alone, is the unity
of all things—a unity in accordance with an aim or purpose; and the
speculative interest of reason renders it necessary to regard all order
in the world as if it originated from the intention and design of a
supreme reason. This principle unfolds to the view of reason in the
sphere of experience new and enlarged prospects, and invites it to
connect the phenomena of the world according to teleological laws, and
in this way to attain to the highest possible degree of systematic
unity. The hypothesis of a supreme intelligence, as the sole cause of
the universe—an intelligence which has for us no more than an ideal
existence—is accordingly always of the greatest service to reason.
Thus, if we presuppose, in relation to the figure of the earth (which
is round, but somewhat flattened at the poles),[71] or that of
mountains or seas, wise designs on the part of an author of the
universe, we cannot fail to make, by the light of this supposition, a
great number of interesting discoveries. If we keep to this hypothesis,
as a principle which is purely regulative, even error cannot be very
detrimental. For, in this case, error can have no more serious
consequences than that, where we expected to discover a teleological
connection (nexus finalis), only a mechanical or physical connection
appears. In such a case, we merely fail to find the additional form of
unity we expected, but we do not lose the rational unity which the mind
requires in its procedure in experience. But even a miscarriage of this
sort cannot affect the law in its general and teleological relations.
For although we may convict an anatomist of an error, when he connects
the limb of some animal with a certain purpose, it is quite impossible
to prove in a single case that any arrangement of nature, be it what it
may, is entirely without aim or design. And thus medical physiology, by
the aid of a principle presented to it by pure reason, extends its very
limited empirical knowledge of the purposes of the different parts of
an organized body so far that it may be asserted with the utmost
confidence, and with the approbation of all reflecting men, that every
organ or bodily part of an animal has its use and answers a certain
design. Now, this is a supposition which, if regarded as of a
constitutive character, goes much farther than any experience or
observation of ours can justify. Hence it is evident that it is nothing
more than a regulative principle of reason, which aims at the highest
degree of systematic unity, by the aid of the idea of a causality
according to design in a supreme cause—a cause which it regards as the
highest intelligence.

 [71] The advantages which a circular form, in the case of the earth,
 has over every other, are well known. But few are aware that the
 slight flattening at the poles, which gives it the figure of a
 spheroid, is the only cause which prevents the elevations of
 continents or even of mountains, perhaps thrown up by some internal
 convulsion, from continually altering the position of the axis of the
 earth—and that to some considerable degree in a short time. The great
 protuberance of the earth under the Equator serves to overbalance the
 impetus of all other masses of earth, and thus to preserve the axis of
 the earth, so far as we can observe, in its present position. And yet
 this wise arrangement has been unthinkingly explained from the
 equilibrium of the formerly fluid mass.

If, however, we neglect this restriction of the idea to a purely
regulative influence, reason is betrayed into numerous errors. For it
has then left the ground of experience, in which alone are to be found
the criteria of truth, and has ventured into the region of the
incomprehensible and unsearchable, on the heights of which it loses its
power and collectedness, because it has completely severed its
connection with experience.

The first error which arises from our employing the idea of a Supreme
Being as a constitutive (in repugnance to the very nature of an idea),
and not as a regulative principle, is the error of inactive reason
(ignava ratio).[72] We may so term every principle which requires us to
regard our investigations of nature as absolutely complete, and allows
reason to cease its inquiries, as if it had fully executed its task.
Thus the psychological idea of the ego, when employed as a constitutive
principle for the explanation of the phenomena of the soul, and for the
extension of our knowledge regarding this subject beyond the limits of
experience—even to the condition of the soul after death—is convenient
enough for the purposes of pure reason, but detrimental and even
ruinous to its interests in the sphere of nature and experience. The
dogmatizing spiritualist explains the unchanging unity of our
personality through all changes of condition from the unity of a
thinking substance, the interest which we take in things and events
that can happen only after our death, from a consciousness of the
immaterial nature of our thinking subject, and so on. Thus he dispenses
with all empirical investigations into the cause of these internal
phenomena, and with all possible explanations of them upon purely
natural grounds; while, at the dictation of a transcendent reason, he
passes by the immanent sources of cognition in experience, greatly to
his own ease and convenience, but to the sacrifice of all, genuine
insight and intelligence. These prejudicial consequences become still
more evident, in the case of the dogmatical treatment of our idea of a
Supreme Intelligence, and the theological system of nature
(physico-theology) which is falsely based upon it. For, in this case,
the aims which we observe in nature, and often those which we merely
fancy to exist, make the investigation of causes a very easy task, by
directing us to refer such and such phenomena immediately to the
unsearchable will and counsel of the Supreme Wisdom, while we ought to
investigate their causes in the general laws of the mechanism of
matter. We are thus recommended to consider the labour of reason as
ended, when we have merely dispensed with its employment, which is
guided surely and safely only by the order of nature and the series of
changes in the world—which are arranged according to immanent and
general laws. This error may be avoided, if we do not merely consider
from the view-point of final aims certain parts of nature, such as the
division and structure of a continent, the constitution and direction
of certain mountain-chains, or even the organization existing in the
vegetable and animal kingdoms, but look upon this systematic unity of
nature in a perfectly general way, in relation to the idea of a Supreme
Intelligence. If we pursue this advice, we lay as a foundation for all
investigation the conformity to aims of all phenomena of nature in
accordance with universal laws, for which no particular arrangement of
nature is exempt, but only cognized by us with more or less difficulty;
and we possess a regulative principle of the systematic unity of a
teleological connection, which we do not attempt to anticipate or
predetermine. All that we do, and ought to do, is to follow out the
physico-mechanical connection in nature according to general laws, with
the hope of discovering, sooner or later, the teleological connection
also. Thus, and thus only, can the principle of final unity aid in the
extension of the employment of reason in the sphere of experience,
without being in any case detrimental to its interests.

 [72] This was the term applied by the old dialecticians to a
 sophistical argument, which ran thus: If it is your fate to die of
 this disease, you will die, whether you employ a physician or not.
 Cicero says that this mode of reasoning has received this appellation,
 because, if followed, it puts an end to the employment of reason in
 the affairs of life. For a similar reason, I have applied this
 designation to the sophistical argument of pure reason.

The second error which arises from the misconception of the principle
of systematic unity is that of perverted reason (perversa ratio,
usteron roteron rationis). The idea of systematic unity is available as
a regulative principle in the connection of phenomena according to
general natural laws; and, how far soever we have to travel upon the
path of experience to discover some fact or event, this idea requires
us to believe that we have approached all the more nearly to the
completion of its use in the sphere of nature, although that completion
can never be attained. But this error reverses the procedure of reason.
We begin by hypostatizing the principle of systematic unity, and by
giving an anthropomorphic determination to the conception of a Supreme
Intelligence, and then proceed forcibly to impose aims upon nature.
Thus not only does teleology, which ought to aid in the completion of
unity in accordance with general laws, operate to the destruction of
its influence, but it hinders reason from attaining its proper aim,
that is, the proof, upon natural grounds, of the existence of a supreme
intelligent cause. For, if we cannot presuppose supreme finality in
nature à priori, that is, as essentially belonging to nature, how can
we be directed to endeavour to discover this unity and, rising
gradually through its different degrees, to approach the supreme
perfection of an author of all—a perfection which is absolutely
necessary, and therefore cognizable à priori? The regulative principle
directs us to presuppose systematic unity absolutely and, consequently,
as following from the essential nature of things—but only as a unity of
nature, not merely cognized empirically, but presupposed à priori,
although only in an indeterminate manner. But if I insist on basing
nature upon the foundation of a supreme ordaining Being, the unity of
nature is in effect lost. For, in this case, it is quite foreign and
unessential to the nature of things, and cannot be cognized from the
general laws of nature. And thus arises a vicious circular argument,
what ought to have been proved having been presupposed.

To take the regulative principle of systematic unity in nature for a
constitutive principle, and to hypostatize and make a cause out of that
which is properly the ideal ground of the consistent and harmonious
exercise of reason, involves reason in inextricable embarrassments. The
investigation of nature pursues its own path under the guidance of the
chain of natural causes, in accordance with the general laws of nature,
and ever follows the light of the idea of an author of the universe—not
for the purpose of deducing the finality, which it constantly pursues,
from this Supreme Being, but to attain to the cognition of his
existence from the finality which it seeks in the existence of the
phenomena of nature, and, if possible, in that of all things to cognize
this being, consequently, as absolutely necessary. Whether this latter
purpose succeed or not, the idea is and must always be a true one, and
its employment, when merely regulative, must always be accompanied by
truthful and beneficial results.

Complete unity, in conformity with aims, constitutes absolute
perfection. But if we do not find this unity in the nature of the
things which go to constitute the world of experience, that is, of
objective cognition, consequently in the universal and necessary laws
of nature, how can we infer from this unity the idea of the supreme and
absolutely necessary perfection of a primal being, which is the origin
of all causality? The greatest systematic unity, and consequently
teleological unity, constitutes the very foundation of the possibility
of the most extended employment of human reason. The idea of unity is
therefore essentially and indissolubly connected with the nature of our
reason. This idea is a legislative one; and hence it is very natural
that we should assume the existence of a legislative reason
corresponding to it, from which the systematic unity of nature—the
object of the operations of reason—must be derived.

In the course of our discussion of the antinomies, we stated that it is
always possible to answer all the questions which pure reason may
raise; and that the plea of the limited nature of our cognition, which
is unavoidable and proper in many questions regarding natural
phenomena, cannot in this case be admitted, because the questions
raised do not relate to the nature of things, but are necessarily
originated by the nature of reason itself, and relate to its own
internal constitution. We can now establish this assertion, which at
first sight appeared so rash, in relation to the two questions in which
reason takes the greatest interest, and thus complete our discussion of
the dialectic of pure reason.

If, then, the question is asked, in relation to transcendental
theology,[73] first, whether there is anything distinct from the world,
which contains the ground of cosmical order and connection according to
general laws? The answer is: Certainly. For the world is a sum of
phenomena; there must, therefore, be some transcendental basis of these
phenomena, that is, a basis cogitable by the pure understanding alone.
If, secondly, the question is asked whether this being is substance,
whether it is of the greatest reality, whether it is necessary, and so
forth? I answer that this question is utterly without meaning. For all
the categories which aid me in forming a conception of an object cannot
be employed except in the world of sense, and are without meaning when
not applied to objects of actual or possible experience. Out of this
sphere, they are not properly conceptions, but the mere marks or
indices of conceptions, which we may admit, although they cannot,
without the help of experience, help us to understand any subject or
thing. If, thirdly, the question is whether we may not cogitate this
being, which is distinct from the world, in analogy with the objects of
experience? The answer is: Undoubtedly, but only as an ideal, and not
as a real object. That is, we must cogitate it only as an unknown
substratum of the systematic unity, order, and finality of the world—a
unity which reason must employ as the regulative principle of its
investigation of nature. Nay, more, we may admit into the idea certain
anthropomorphic elements, which are promotive of the interests of this
regulative principle. For it is no more than an idea, which does not
relate directly to a being distinct from the world, but to the
regulative principle of the systematic unity of the world, by means,
however, of a schema of this unity—the schema of a Supreme
Intelligence, who is the wisely-designing author of the universe. What
this basis of cosmical unity may be in itself, we know not—we cannot
discover from the idea; we merely know how we ought to employ the idea
of this unity, in relation to the systematic operation of reason in the
sphere of experience.

 [73] After what has been said of the psychological idea of the ego and
 its proper employment as a regulative principle of the operations of
 reason, I need not enter into details regarding the transcendental
 illusion by which the systematic unity of all the various phenomena of
 the internal sense is hypostatized. The procedure is in this case very
 similar to that which has been discussed in our remarks on the
 theological ideal.

But, it will be asked again, can we on these grounds, admit the
existence of a wise and omnipotent author of the world? Without doubt;
and not only so, but we must assume the existence of such a being. But
do we thus extend the limits of our knowledge beyond the field of
possible experience? By no means. For we have merely presupposed a
something, of which we have no conception, which we do not know as it
is in itself; but, in relation to the systematic disposition of the
universe, which we must presuppose in all our observation of nature, we
have cogitated this unknown being in analogy with an intelligent
existence (an empirical conception), that is to say, we have endowed it
with those attributes, which, judging from the nature of our own
reason, may contain the ground of such a systematic unity. This idea is
therefore valid only relatively to the employment in experience of our
reason. But if we attribute to it absolute and objective validity, we
overlook the fact that it is merely an ideal being that we cogitate;
and, by setting out from a basis which is not determinable by
considerations drawn from experience, we place ourselves in a position
which incapacitates us from applying this principle to the empirical
employment of reason.

But, it will be asked further, can I make any use of this conception
and hypothesis in my investigations into the world and nature? Yes, for
this very purpose was the idea established by reason as a fundamental
basis. But may I regard certain arrangements, which seemed to have been
made in conformity with some fixed aim, as the arrangements of design,
and look upon them as proceeding from the divine will, with the
intervention, however, of certain other particular arrangements
disposed to that end? Yes, you may do so; but at the same time you must
regard it as indifferent, whether it is asserted that divine wisdom has
disposed all things in conformity with his highest aims, or that the
idea of supreme wisdom is a regulative principle in the investigation
of nature, and at the same time a principle of the systematic unity of
nature according to general laws, even in those cases where we are
unable to discover that unity. In other words, it must be perfectly
indifferent to you whether you say, when you have discovered this
unity: God has wisely willed it so; or: Nature has wisely arranged
this. For it was nothing but the systematic unity, which reason
requires as a basis for the investigation of nature, that justified you
in accepting the idea of a supreme intelligence as a schema for a
regulative principle; and, the farther you advance in the discovery of
design and finality, the more certain the validity of your idea. But,
as the whole aim of this regulative principle was the discovery of a
necessary and systematic unity in nature, we have, in so far as we
attain this, to attribute our success to the idea of a Supreme Being;
while, at the same time, we cannot, without involving ourselves in
contradictions, overlook the general laws of nature, as it was in
reference to them alone that this idea was employed. We cannot, I say,
overlook the general laws of nature, and regard this conformity to aims
observable in nature as contingent or hyperphysical in its origin;
inasmuch as there is no ground which can justify us in the admission of
a being with such properties distinct from and above nature. All that
we are authorized to assert is that this idea may be employed as a
principle, and that the properties of the being which is assumed to
correspond to it may be regarded as systematically connected in analogy
with the causal determination of phenomena.

For the same reasons we are justified in introducing into the idea of
the supreme cause other anthropomorphic elements (for without these we
could not predicate anything of it); we may regard it as allowable to
cogitate this cause as a being with understanding, the feelings of
pleasure and displeasure, and faculties of desire and will
corresponding to these. At the same time, we may attribute to this
being infinite perfection—a perfection which necessarily transcends
that which our knowledge of the order and design in the world authorize
us to predicate of it. For the regulative law of systematic unity
requires us to study nature on the supposition that systematic and
final unity in infinitum is everywhere discoverable, even in the
highest diversity. For, although we may discover little of this
cosmical perfection, it belongs to the legislative prerogative of
reason to require us always to seek for and to expect it; while it must
always be beneficial to institute all inquiries into nature in
accordance with this principle. But it is evident that, by this idea of
a supreme author of all, which I place as the foundation of all
inquiries into nature, I do not mean to assert the existence of such a
being, or that I have any knowledge of its existence; and,
consequently, I do not really deduce anything from the existence of
this being, but merely from its idea, that is to say, from the nature
of things in this world, in accordance with this idea. A certain dim
consciousness of the true use of this idea seems to have dictated to
the philosophers of all times the moderate language used by them
regarding the cause of the world. We find them employing the
expressions wisdom and care of nature, and divine wisdom, as
synonymous—nay, in purely speculative discussions, preferring the
former, because it does not carry the appearance of greater pretensions
than such as we are entitled to make, and at the same time directs
reason to its proper field of action—nature and her phenomena.

Thus, pure reason, which at first seemed to promise us nothing less
than the extension of our cognition beyond the limits of experience, is
found, when thoroughly examined, to contain nothing but regulative
principles, the virtue and function of which is to introduce into our
cognition a higher degree of unity than the understanding could of
itself. These principles, by placing the goal of all our struggles at
so great a distance, realize for us the most thorough connection
between the different parts of our cognition, and the highest degree of
systematic unity. But, on the other hand, if misunderstood and employed
as constitutive principles of transcendent cognition, they become the
parents of illusions and contradictions, while pretending to introduce
us to new regions of knowledge.

Thus all human cognition begins with intuitions, proceeds from thence
to conceptions, and ends with ideas. Although it possesses, in relation
to all three elements, à priori sources of cognition, which seemed to
transcend the limits of all experience, a thoroughgoing criticism
demonstrates that speculative reason can never, by the aid of these
elements, pass the bounds of possible experience, and that the proper
destination of this highest faculty of cognition is to employ all
methods, and all the principles of these methods, for the purpose of
penetrating into the innermost secrets of nature, by the aid of the
principles of unity (among all kinds of which teleological unity is the
highest), while it ought not to attempt to soar above the sphere of
experience, beyond which there lies nought for us but the void inane.
The critical examination, in our Transcendental Analytic, of all the
propositions which professed to extend cognition beyond the sphere of
experience, completely demonstrated that they can only conduct us to a
possible experience. If we were not distrustful even of the clearest
abstract theorems, if we were not allured by specious and inviting
prospects to escape from the constraining power of their evidence, we
might spare ourselves the laborious examination of all the dialectical
arguments which a transcendent reason adduces in support of its
pretensions; for we should know with the most complete certainty that,
however honest such professions might be, they are null and valueless,
because they relate to a kind of knowledge to which no man can by any
possibility attain. But, as there is no end to discussion, if we cannot
discover the true cause of the illusions by which even the wisest are
deceived, and as the analysis of all our transcendent cognition into
its elements is of itself of no slight value as a psychological study,
while it is a duty incumbent on every philosopher—it was found
necessary to investigate the dialectical procedure of reason in its
primary sources. And as the inferences of which this dialectic is the
parent are not only deceitful, but naturally possess a profound
interest for humanity, it was advisable at the same time, to give a
full account of the momenta of this dialectical procedure, and to
deposit it in the archives of human reason, as a warning to all future
metaphysicians to avoid these causes of speculative error.

II. Transcendental Doctrine of Method

If we regard the sum of the cognition of pure speculative reason as an
edifice, the idea of which, at least, exists in the human mind, it may
be said that we have in the Transcendental Doctrine of Elements
examined the materials and determined to what edifice these belong, and
what its height and stability. We have found, indeed, that, although we
had purposed to build for ourselves a tower which should reach to
Heaven, the supply of materials sufficed merely for a habitation, which
was spacious enough for all terrestrial purposes, and high enough to
enable us to survey the level plain of experience, but that the bold
undertaking designed necessarily failed for want of materials—not to
mention the confusion of tongues, which gave rise to endless disputes
among the labourers on the plan of the edifice, and at last scattered
them over all the world, each to erect a separate building for himself,
according to his own plans and his own inclinations. Our present task
relates not to the materials, but to the plan of an edifice; and, as we
have had sufficient warning not to venture blindly upon a design which
may be found to transcend our natural powers, while, at the same time,
we cannot give up the intention of erecting a secure abode for the
mind, we must proportion our design to the material which is presented
to us, and which is, at the same time, sufficient for all our wants.

I understand, then, by the transcendental doctrine of method, the
determination of the formal conditions of a complete system of pure
reason. We shall accordingly have to treat of the discipline, the
canon, the architectonic, and, finally, the history of pure reason.
This part of our Critique will accomplish, from the transcendental
point of view, what has been usually attempted, but miserably executed,
under the name of practical logic. It has been badly executed, I say,
because general logic, not being limited to any particular kind of
cognition (not even to the pure cognition of the understanding) nor to
any particular objects, it cannot, without borrowing from other
sciences, do more than present merely the titles or signs of possible
methods and the technical expressions, which are employed in the
systematic parts of all sciences; and thus the pupil is made acquainted
with names, the meaning and application of which he is to learn only at
some future time.

Chapter I. The Discipline of Pure Reason

Negative judgements—those which are so not merely as regards their
logical form, but in respect of their content—are not commonly held in
especial respect. They are, on the contrary, regarded as jealous
enemies of our insatiable desire for knowledge; and it almost requires
an apology to induce us to tolerate, much less to prize and to respect
them.

All propositions, indeed, may be logically expressed in a negative
form; but, in relation to the content of our cognition, the peculiar
province of negative judgements is solely to prevent error. For this
reason, too, negative propositions, which are framed for the purpose of
correcting false cognitions where error is absolutely impossible, are
undoubtedly true, but inane and senseless; that is, they are in reality
purposeless and, for this reason, often very ridiculous. Such is the
proposition of the schoolman that Alexander could not have subdued any
countries without an army.

But where the limits of our possible cognition are very much
contracted, the attraction to new fields of knowledge great, the
illusions to which the mind is subject of the most deceptive character,
and the evil consequences of error of no inconsiderable magnitude—the
negative element in knowledge, which is useful only to guard us against
error, is of far more importance than much of that positive instruction
which makes additions to the sum of our knowledge. The restraint which
is employed to repress, and finally to extirpate the constant
inclination to depart from certain rules, is termed discipline. It is
distinguished from culture, which aims at the formation of a certain
degree of skill, without attempting to repress or to destroy any other
mental power, already existing. In the cultivation of a talent, which
has given evidence of an impulse towards self-development, discipline
takes a negative,[74] culture and doctrine a positive, part.

 [74] I am well aware that, in the language of the schools, the term
 discipline is usually employed as synonymous with instruction. But
 there are so many cases in which it is necessary to distinguish the
 notion of the former, as a course of corrective training, from that of
 the latter, as the communication of knowledge, and the nature of
 things itself demands the appropriation of the most suitable
 expressions for this distinction, that it is my desire that the former
 terms should never be employed in any other than a negative
 signification.

That natural dispositions and talents (such as imagination and wit),
which ask a free and unlimited development, require in many respects
the corrective influence of discipline, every one will readily grant.
But it may well appear strange that reason, whose proper duty it is to
prescribe rules of discipline to all the other powers of the mind,
should itself require this corrective. It has, in fact, hitherto
escaped this humiliation, only because, in presence of its magnificent
pretensions and high position, no one could readily suspect it to be
capable of substituting fancies for conceptions, and words for things.

Reason, when employed in the field of experience, does not stand in
need of criticism, because its principles are subjected to the
continual test of empirical observations. Nor is criticism requisite in
the sphere of mathematics, where the conceptions of reason must always
be presented in concreto in pure intuition, and baseless or arbitrary
assertions are discovered without difficulty. But where reason is not
held in a plain track by the influence of empirical or of pure
intuition, that is, when it is employed in the transcendental sphere of
pure conceptions, it stands in great need of discipline, to restrain
its propensity to overstep the limits of possible experience and to
keep it from wandering into error. In fact, the utility of the
philosophy of pure reason is entirely of this negative character.
Particular errors may be corrected by particular animadversions, and
the causes of these errors may be eradicated by criticism. But where we
find, as in the case of pure reason, a complete system of illusions and
fallacies, closely connected with each other and depending upon grand
general principles, there seems to be required a peculiar and negative
code of mental legislation, which, under the denomination of a
discipline, and founded upon the nature of reason and the objects of
its exercise, shall constitute a system of thorough examination and
testing, which no fallacy will be able to withstand or escape from,
under whatever disguise or concealment it may lurk.

But the reader must remark that, in this the second division of our
transcendental Critique the discipline of pure reason is not directed
to the content, but to the method of the cognition of pure reason. The
former task has been completed in the doctrine of elements. But there
is so much similarity in the mode of employing the faculty of reason,
whatever be the object to which it is applied, while, at the same time,
its employment in the transcendental sphere is so essentially different
in kind from every other, that, without the warning negative influence
of a discipline specially directed to that end, the errors are
unavoidable which spring from the unskillful employment of the methods
which are originated by reason but which are out of place in this
sphere.

Section I. The Discipline of Pure Reason in the Sphere of Dogmatism

The science of mathematics presents the most brilliant example of the
extension of the sphere of pure reason without the aid of experience.
Examples are always contagious; and they exert an especial influence on
the same faculty, which naturally flatters itself that it will have the
same good fortune in other case as fell to its lot in one fortunate
instance. Hence pure reason hopes to be able to extend its empire in
the transcendental sphere with equal success and security, especially
when it applies the same method which was attended with such brilliant
results in the science of mathematics. It is, therefore, of the highest
importance for us to know whether the method of arriving at
demonstrative certainty, which is termed mathematical, be identical
with that by which we endeavour to attain the same degree of certainty
in philosophy, and which is termed in that science dogmatical.

Philosophical cognition is the cognition of reason by means of
conceptions; mathematical cognition is cognition by means of the
construction of conceptions. The construction of a conception is the
presentation à priori of the intuition which corresponds to the
conception. For this purpose a non-empirical intuition is requisite,
which, as an intuition, is an individual object; while, as the
construction of a conception (a general representation), it must be
seen to be universally valid for all the possible intuitions which rank
under that conception. Thus I construct a triangle, by the presentation
of the object which corresponds to this conception, either by mere
imagination, in pure intuition, or upon paper, in empirical intuition,
in both cases completely à priori, without borrowing the type of that
figure from any experience. The individual figure drawn upon paper is
empirical; but it serves, notwithstanding, to indicate the conception,
even in its universality, because in this empirical intuition we keep
our eye merely on the act of the construction of the conception, and
pay no attention to the various modes of determining it, for example,
its size, the length of its sides, the size of its angles, these not in
the least affecting the essential character of the conception.

Philosophical cognition, accordingly, regards the particular only in
the general; mathematical the general in the particular, nay, in the
individual. This is done, however, entirely à priori and by means of
pure reason, so that, as this individual figure is determined under
certain universal conditions of construction, the object of the
conception, to which this individual figure corresponds as its schema,
must be cogitated as universally determined.

The essential difference of these two modes of cognition consists,
therefore, in this formal quality; it does not regard the difference of
the matter or objects of both. Those thinkers who aim at distinguishing
philosophy from mathematics by asserting that the former has to do with
quality merely, and the latter with quantity, have mistaken the effect
for the cause. The reason why mathematical cognition can relate only to
quantity is to be found in its form alone. For it is the conception of
quantities only that is capable of being constructed, that is,
presented à priori in intuition; while qualities cannot be given in any
other than an empirical intuition. Hence the cognition of qualities by
reason is possible only through conceptions. No one can find an
intuition which shall correspond to the conception of reality, except
in experience; it cannot be presented to the mind à priori and
antecedently to the empirical consciousness of a reality. We can form
an intuition, by means of the mere conception of it, of a cone, without
the aid of experience; but the colour of the cone we cannot know except
from experience. I cannot present an intuition of a cause, except in an
example which experience offers to me. Besides, philosophy, as well as
mathematics, treats of quantities; as, for example, of totality,
infinity, and so on. Mathematics, too, treats of the difference of
lines and surfaces—as spaces of different quality, of the continuity of
extension—as a quality thereof. But, although in such cases they have a
common object, the mode in which reason considers that object is very
different in philosophy from what it is in mathematics. The former
confines itself to the general conceptions; the latter can do nothing
with a mere conception, it hastens to intuition. In this intuition it
regards the conception in concreto, not empirically, but in an à priori
intuition, which it has constructed; and in which, all the results
which follow from the general conditions of the construction of the
conception are in all cases valid for the object of the constructed
conception.

Suppose that the conception of a triangle is given to a philosopher and
that he is required to discover, by the philosophical method, what
relation the sum of its angles bears to a right angle. He has nothing
before him but the conception of a figure enclosed within three right
lines, and, consequently, with the same number of angles. He may
analyse the conception of a right line, of an angle, or of the number
three as long as he pleases, but he will not discover any properties
not contained in these conceptions. But, if this question is proposed
to a geometrician, he at once begins by constructing a triangle. He
knows that two right angles are equal to the sum of all the contiguous
angles which proceed from one point in a straight line; and he goes on
to produce one side of his triangle, thus forming two adjacent angles
which are together equal to two right angles. He then divides the
exterior of these angles, by drawing a line parallel with the opposite
side of the triangle, and immediately perceives that he has thus got an
exterior adjacent angle which is equal to the interior. Proceeding in
this way, through a chain of inferences, and always on the ground of
intuition, he arrives at a clear and universally valid solution of the
question.

But mathematics does not confine itself to the construction of
quantities (quanta), as in the case of geometry; it occupies itself
with pure quantity also (quantitas), as in the case of algebra, where
complete abstraction is made of the properties of the object indicated
by the conception of quantity. In algebra, a certain method of notation
by signs is adopted, and these indicate the different possible
constructions of quantities, the extraction of roots, and so on. After
having thus denoted the general conception of quantities, according to
their different relations, the different operations by which quantity
or number is increased or diminished are presented in intuition in
accordance with general rules. Thus, when one quantity is to be divided
by another, the signs which denote both are placed in the form peculiar
to the operation of division; and thus algebra, by means of a
symbolical construction of quantity, just as geometry, with its
ostensive or geometrical construction (a construction of the objects
themselves), arrives at results which discursive cognition cannot hope
to reach by the aid of mere conceptions.

Now, what is the cause of this difference in the fortune of the
philosopher and the mathematician, the former of whom follows the path
of conceptions, while the latter pursues that of intuitions, which he
represents, à priori, in correspondence with his conceptions? The cause
is evident from what has been already demonstrated in the introduction
to this Critique. We do not, in the present case, want to discover
analytical propositions, which may be produced merely by analysing our
conceptions—for in this the philosopher would have the advantage over
his rival; we aim at the discovery of synthetical propositions—such
synthetical propositions, moreover, as can be cognized à priori. I must
not confine myself to that which I actually cogitate in my conception
of a triangle, for this is nothing more than the mere definition; I
must try to go beyond that, and to arrive at properties which are not
contained in, although they belong to, the conception. Now, this is
impossible, unless I determine the object present to my mind according
to the conditions, either of empirical, or of pure, intuition. In the
former case, I should have an empirical proposition (arrived at by
actual measurement of the angles of the triangle), which would possess
neither universality nor necessity; but that would be of no value. In
the latter, I proceed by geometrical construction, by means of which I
collect, in a pure intuition, just as I would in an empirical
intuition, all the various properties which belong to the schema of a
triangle in general, and consequently to its conception, and thus
construct synthetical propositions which possess the attribute of
universality.

It would be vain to philosophize upon the triangle, that is, to reflect
on it discursively; I should get no further than the definition with
which I had been obliged to set out. There are certainly transcendental
synthetical propositions which are framed by means of pure conceptions,
and which form the peculiar distinction of philosophy; but these do not
relate to any particular thing, but to a thing in general, and enounce
the conditions under which the perception of it may become a part of
possible experience. But the science of mathematics has nothing to do
with such questions, nor with the question of existence in any fashion;
it is concerned merely with the properties of objects in themselves,
only in so far as these are connected with the conception of the
objects.

In the above example, we merely attempted to show the great difference
which exists between the discursive employment of reason in the sphere
of conceptions, and its intuitive exercise by means of the construction
of conceptions. The question naturally arises: What is the cause which
necessitates this twofold exercise of reason, and how are we to
discover whether it is the philosophical or the mathematical method
which reason is pursuing in an argument?

All our knowledge relates, finally, to possible intuitions, for it is
these alone that present objects to the mind. An à priori or
non-empirical conception contains either a pure intuition—and in this
case it can be constructed; or it contains nothing but the synthesis of
possible intuitions, which are not given à priori. In this latter case,
it may help us to form synthetical à priori judgements, but only in the
discursive method, by conceptions, not in the intuitive, by means of
the construction of conceptions.

The only à priori intuition is that of the pure form of phenomena—space
and time. A conception of space and time as quanta may be presented à
priori in intuition, that is, constructed, either alone with their
quality (figure), or as pure quantity (the mere synthesis of the
homogeneous), by means of number. But the matter of phenomena, by which
things are given in space and time, can be presented only in
perception, à posteriori. The only conception which represents à priori
this empirical content of phenomena is the conception of a thing in
general; and the à priori synthetical cognition of this conception can
give us nothing more than the rule for the synthesis of that which may
be contained in the corresponding à posteriori perception; it is
utterly inadequate to present an à priori intuition of the real object,
which must necessarily be empirical.

Synthetical propositions, which relate to things in general, an à
priori intuition of which is impossible, are transcendental. For this
reason transcendental propositions cannot be framed by means of the
construction of conceptions; they are à priori, and based entirely on
conceptions themselves. They contain merely the rule, by which we are
to seek in the world of perception or experience the synthetical unity
of that which cannot be intuited à priori. But they are incompetent to
present any of the conceptions which appear in them in an à priori
intuition; these can be given only à posteriori, in experience, which,
however, is itself possible only through these synthetical principles.

If we are to form a synthetical judgement regarding a conception,
we must go beyond it, to the intuition in which it is given. If we
keep to what is contained in the conception, the judgement is merely
analytical—it is merely an explanation of what we have cogitated in
the conception. But I can pass from the conception to the pure or
empirical intuition which corresponds to it. I can proceed to examine
my conception in concreto, and to cognize, either à priori or à
posteriori, what I find in the object of the conception. The former—à
priori cognition—is rational-mathematical cognition by means of the
construction of the conception; the latter—à posteriori cognition—is
purely empirical cognition, which does not possess the attributes
of necessity and universality. Thus I may analyse the conception I
have of gold; but I gain no new information from this analysis, I
merely enumerate the different properties which I had connected with
the notion indicated by the word. My knowledge has gained in logical
clearness and arrangement, but no addition has been made to it. But
if I take the matter which is indicated by this name, and submit
it to the examination of my senses, I am enabled to form several
synthetical—although still empirical—propositions. The mathematical
conception of a triangle I should construct, that is, present à priori
in intuition, and in this way attain to rational-synthetical cognition.
But when the transcendental conception of reality, or substance, or
power is presented to my mind, I find that it does not relate to or
indicate either an empirical or pure intuition, but that it indicates
merely the synthesis of empirical intuitions, which cannot of course
be given à priori. The synthesis in such a conception cannot proceed à
priori—without the aid of experience—to the intuition which corresponds
to the conception; and, for this reason, none of these conceptions can
produce a determinative synthetical proposition, they can never present
more than a principle of the synthesis[75] of possible empirical
intuitions. A transcendental proposition is, therefore, a synthetical
cognition of reason by means of pure conceptions and the discursive
method, and it renders possible all synthetical unity in empirical
cognition, though it cannot present us with any intuition à priori.

 [75] In the case of the conception of cause, I do really go beyond the
 empirical conception of an event—but not to the intuition which
 presents this conception in concreto, but only to the time-conditions,
 which may be found in experience to correspond to the conception. My
 procedure is, therefore, strictly according to conceptions; I cannot
 in a case of this kind employ the construction of conceptions, because
 the conception is merely a rule for the synthesis of perceptions,
 which are not pure intuitions, and which, therefore, cannot be given à
 priori.

There is thus a twofold exercise of reason. Both modes have the
properties of universality and an à priori origin in common, but are,
in their procedure, of widely different character. The reason of this
is that in the world of phenomena, in which alone objects are presented
to our minds, there are two main elements—the form of intuition (space
and time), which can be cognized and determined completely à priori,
and the matter or content—that which is presented in space and time,
and which, consequently, contains a something—an existence
corresponding to our powers of sensation. As regards the latter, which
can never be given in a determinate mode except by experience, there
are no à priori notions which relate to it, except the undetermined
conceptions of the synthesis of possible sensations, in so far as these
belong (in a possible experience) to the unity of consciousness. As
regards the former, we can determine our conceptions à priori in
intuition, inasmuch as we are ourselves the creators of the objects of
the conceptions in space and time—these objects being regarded simply
as quanta. In the one case, reason proceeds according to conceptions
and can do nothing more than subject phenomena to these—which can only
be determined empirically, that is, à posteriori—in conformity,
however, with those conceptions as the rules of all empirical
synthesis. In the other case, reason proceeds by the construction of
conceptions; and, as these conceptions relate to an à priori intuition,
they may be given and determined in pure intuition à priori, and
without the aid of empirical data. The examination and consideration of
everything that exists in space or time—whether it is a quantum or not,
in how far the particular something (which fills space or time) is a
primary substratum, or a mere determination of some other existence,
whether it relates to anything else—either as cause or effect, whether
its existence is isolated or in reciprocal connection with and
dependence upon others, the possibility of this existence, its reality
and necessity or opposites—all these form part of the cognition of
reason on the ground of conceptions, and this cognition is termed
philosophical. But to determine à priori an intuition in space (its
figure), to divide time into periods, or merely to cognize the quantity
of an intuition in space and time, and to determine it by number—all
this is an operation of reason by means of the construction of
conceptions, and is called mathematical.

The success which attends the efforts of reason in the sphere of
mathematics naturally fosters the expectation that the same good
fortune will be its lot, if it applies the mathematical method in other
regions of mental endeavour besides that of quantities. Its success is
thus great, because it can support all its conceptions by à priori
intuitions and, in this way, make itself a master, as it were, over
nature; while pure philosophy, with its à priori discursive
conceptions, bungles about in the world of nature, and cannot accredit
or show any à priori evidence of the reality of these conceptions.
Masters in the science of mathematics are confident of the success of
this method; indeed, it is a common persuasion that it is capable of
being applied to any subject of human thought. They have hardly ever
reflected or philosophized on their favourite science—a task of great
difficulty; and the specific difference between the two modes of
employing the faculty of reason has never entered their thoughts. Rules
current in the field of common experience, and which common sense
stamps everywhere with its approval, are regarded by them as axiomatic.
From what source the conceptions of space and time, with which (as the
only primitive quanta) they have to deal, enter their minds, is a
question which they do not trouble themselves to answer; and they think
it just as unnecessary to examine into the origin of the pure
conceptions of the understanding and the extent of their validity. All
they have to do with them is to employ them. In all this they are
perfectly right, if they do not overstep the limits of the sphere of
nature. But they pass, unconsciously, from the world of sense to the
insecure ground of pure transcendental conceptions (instabilis tellus,
innabilis unda), where they can neither stand nor swim, and where the
tracks of their footsteps are obliterated by time; while the march of
mathematics is pursued on a broad and magnificent highway, which the
latest posterity shall frequent without fear of danger or impediment.

As we have taken upon us the task of determining, clearly and
certainly, the limits of pure reason in the sphere of
transcendentalism, and as the efforts of reason in this direction are
persisted in, even after the plainest and most expressive warnings,
hope still beckoning us past the limits of experience into the
splendours of the intellectual world—it becomes necessary to cut away
the last anchor of this fallacious and fantastic hope. We shall,
accordingly, show that the mathematical method is unattended in the
sphere of philosophy by the least advantage—except, perhaps, that it
more plainly exhibits its own inadequacy—that geometry and philosophy
are two quite different things, although they go hand in hand in the
field of natural science, and, consequently, that the procedure of the
one can never be imitated by the other.

The evidence of mathematics rests upon definitions, axioms, and
demonstrations. I shall be satisfied with showing that none of these
forms can be employed or imitated in philosophy in the sense in which
they are understood by mathematicians; and that the geometrician, if he
employs his method in philosophy, will succeed only in building
card-castles, while the employment of the philosophical method in
mathematics can result in nothing but mere verbiage. The essential
business of philosophy, indeed, is to mark out the limits of the
science; and even the mathematician, unless his talent is naturally
circumscribed and limited to this particular department of knowledge,
cannot turn a deaf ear to the warnings of philosophy, or set himself
above its direction.

I. Of Definitions. A definition is, as the term itself indicates, the
representation, upon primary grounds, of the complete conception of a
thing within its own limits.[76] Accordingly, an empirical conception
cannot be defined, it can only be explained. For, as there are in such
a conception only a certain number of marks or signs, which denote a
certain class of sensuous objects, we can never be sure that we do not
cogitate under the word which indicates the same object, at one time a
greater, at another a smaller number of signs. Thus, one person may
cogitate in his conception of gold, in addition to its properties of
weight, colour, malleability, that of resisting rust, while another
person may be ignorant of this quality. We employ certain signs only so
long as we require them for the sake of distinction; new observations
abstract some and add new ones, so that an empirical conception never
remains within permanent limits. It is, in fact, useless to define a
conception of this kind. If, for example, we are speaking of water and
its properties, we do not stop at what we actually think by the word
water, but proceed to observation and experiment; and the word, with
the few signs attached to it, is more properly a designation than a
conception of the thing. A definition in this case would evidently be
nothing more than a determination of the word. In the second place, no
à priori conception, such as those of substance, cause, right, fitness,
and so on, can be defined. For I can never be sure, that the clear
representation of a given conception (which is given in a confused
state) has been fully developed, until I know that the representation
is adequate with its object. But, inasmuch as the conception, as it is
presented to the mind, may contain a number of obscure representations,
which we do not observe in our analysis, although we employ them in our
application of the conception, I can never be sure that my analysis is
complete, while examples may make this probable, although they can
never demonstrate the fact. Instead of the word definition, I should
rather employ the term exposition—a more modest expression, which the
critic may accept without surrendering his doubts as to the
completeness of the analysis of any such conception. As, therefore,
neither empirical nor à priori conceptions are capable of definition,
we have to see whether the only other kind of conceptions—arbitrary
conceptions—can be subjected to this mental operation. Such a
conception can always be defined; for I must know thoroughly what I
wished to cogitate in it, as it was I who created it, and it was not
given to my mind either by the nature of my understanding or by
experience. At the same time, I cannot say that, by such a definition,
I have defined a real object. If the conception is based upon empirical
conditions, if, for example, I have a conception of a clock for a ship,
this arbitrary conception does not assure me of the existence or even
of the possibility of the object. My definition of such a conception
would with more propriety be termed a declaration of a project than a
definition of an object. There are no other conceptions which can bear
definition, except those which contain an arbitrary synthesis, which
can be constructed à priori. Consequently, the science of mathematics
alone possesses definitions. For the object here thought is presented à
priori in intuition; and thus it can never contain more or less than
the conception, because the conception of the object has been given by
the definition—and primarily, that is, without deriving the definition
from any other source. Philosophical definitions are, therefore, merely
expositions of given conceptions, while mathematical definitions are
constructions of conceptions originally formed by the mind itself; the
former are produced by analysis, the completeness of which is never
demonstratively certain, the latter by a synthesis. In a mathematical
definition the conception is formed, in a philosophical definition it
is only explained. From this it follows:

 [76] The definition must describe the conception completely that is,
 omit none of the marks or signs of which it composed; within its own
 limits, that is, it must be precise, and enumerate no more signs than
 belong to the conception; and on primary grounds, that is to say, the
 limitations of the bounds of the conception must not be deduced from
 other conceptions, as in this case a proof would be necessary, and the
 so-called definition would be incapable of taking its place at the
 head of all the judgements we have to form regarding an object.

(a) That we must not imitate, in philosophy, the mathematical usage of
commencing with definitions—except by way of hypothesis or experiment.
For, as all so-called philosophical definitions are merely analyses of
given conceptions, these conceptions, although only in a confused form,
must precede the analysis; and the incomplete exposition must precede
the complete, so that we may be able to draw certain inferences from
the characteristics which an incomplete analysis has enabled us to
discover, before we attain to the complete exposition or definition of
the conception. In one word, a full and clear definition ought, in
philosophy, rather to form the conclusion than the commencement of our
labours.[77] In mathematics, on the contrary, we cannot have a
conception prior to the definition; it is the definition which gives us
the conception, and it must for this reason form the commencement of
every chain of mathematical reasoning.

 [77] Philosophy abounds in faulty definitions, especially such as
 contain some of the elements requisite to form a complete definition.
 If a conception could not be employed in reasoning before it had been
 defined, it would fare ill with all philosophical thought. But, as
 incompletely defined conceptions may always be employed without
 detriment to truth, so far as our analysis of the elements contained
 in them proceeds, imperfect definitions, that is, propositions which
 are properly not definitions, but merely approximations thereto, may
 be used with great advantage. In mathematics, definition belongs ad
 esse, in philosophy ad melius esse. It is a difficult task to
 construct a proper definition. Jurists are still without a complete
 definition of the idea of right.

(b) Mathematical definitions cannot be erroneous. For the conception is
given only in and through the definition, and thus it contains only
what has been cogitated in the definition. But although a definition
cannot be incorrect, as regards its content, an error may sometimes,
although seldom, creep into the form. This error consists in a want of
precision. Thus the common definition of a circle—that it is a curved
line, every point in which is equally distant from another point called
the centre—is faulty, from the fact that the determination indicated by
the word curved is superfluous. For there ought to be a particular
theorem, which may be easily proved from the definition, to the effect
that every line, which has all its points at equal distances from
another point, must be a curved line—that is, that not even the
smallest part of it can be straight. Analytical definitions, on the
other hand, may be erroneous in many respects, either by the
introduction of signs which do not actually exist in the conception, or
by wanting in that completeness which forms the essential of a
definition. In the latter case, the definition is necessarily
defective, because we can never be fully certain of the completeness of
our analysis. For these reasons, the method of definition employed in
mathematics cannot be imitated in philosophy.

2. Of Axioms. These, in so far as they are immediately certain, are à
priori synthetical principles. Now, one conception cannot be connected
synthetically and yet immediately with another; because, if we wish to
proceed out of and beyond a conception, a third mediating cognition is
necessary. And, as philosophy is a cognition of reason by the aid of
conceptions alone, there is to be found in it no principle which
deserves to be called an axiom. Mathematics, on the other hand, may
possess axioms, because it can always connect the predicates of an
object à priori, and without any mediating term, by means of the
construction of conceptions in intuition. Such is the case with the
proposition: Three points can always lie in a plane. On the other hand,
no synthetical principle which is based upon conceptions, can ever be
immediately certain (for example, the proposition: Everything that
happens has a cause), because I require a mediating term to connect the
two conceptions of event and cause—namely, the condition of
time-determination in an experience, and I cannot cognize any such
principle immediately and from conceptions alone. Discursive principles
are, accordingly, very different from intuitive principles or axioms.
The former always require deduction, which in the case of the latter
may be altogether dispensed with. Axioms are, for this reason, always
self-evident, while philosophical principles, whatever may be the
degree of certainty they possess, cannot lay any claim to such a
distinction. No synthetical proposition of pure transcendental reason
can be so evident, as is often rashly enough declared, as the
statement, twice two are four. It is true that in the Analytic I
introduced into the list of principles of the pure understanding,
certain axioms of intuition; but the principle there discussed was not
itself an axiom, but served merely to present the principle of the
possibility of axioms in general, while it was really nothing more than
a principle based upon conceptions. For it is one part of the duty of
transcendental philosophy to establish the possibility of mathematics
itself. Philosophy possesses, then, no axioms, and has no right to
impose its à priori principles upon thought, until it has established
their authority and validity by a thoroughgoing deduction.

3. Of Demonstrations. Only an apodeictic proof, based upon intuition,
can be termed a demonstration. Experience teaches us what is, but it
cannot convince us that it might not have been otherwise. Hence a proof
upon empirical grounds cannot be apodeictic. À priori conceptions, in
discursive cognition, can never produce intuitive certainty or
evidence, however certain the judgement they present may be.
Mathematics alone, therefore, contains demonstrations, because it does
not deduce its cognition from conceptions, but from the construction of
conceptions, that is, from intuition, which can be given à priori in
accordance with conceptions. The method of algebra, in equations, from
which the correct answer is deduced by reduction, is a kind of
construction—not geometrical, but by symbols—in which all conceptions,
especially those of the relations of quantities, are represented in
intuition by signs; and thus the conclusions in that science are
secured from errors by the fact that every proof is submitted to ocular
evidence. Philosophical cognition does not possess this advantage, it
being required to consider the general always in abstracto (by means of
conceptions), while mathematics can always consider it in concreto (in
an individual intuition), and at the same time by means of à priori
representation, whereby all errors are rendered manifest to the senses.
The former—discursive proofs—ought to be termed acroamatic proofs,
rather than demonstrations, as only words are employed in them, while
demonstrations proper, as the term itself indicates, always require a
reference to the intuition of the object.

It follows from all these considerations that it is not consonant with
the nature of philosophy, especially in the sphere of pure reason, to
employ the dogmatical method, and to adorn itself with the titles and
insignia of mathematical science. It does not belong to that order, and
can only hope for a fraternal union with that science. Its attempts at
mathematical evidence are vain pretensions, which can only keep it back
from its true aim, which is to detect the illusory procedure of reason
when transgressing its proper limits, and by fully explaining and
analysing our conceptions, to conduct us from the dim regions of
speculation to the clear region of modest self-knowledge. Reason must
not, therefore, in its transcendental endeavours, look forward with
such confidence, as if the path it is pursuing led straight to its aim,
nor reckon with such security upon its premisses, as to consider it
unnecessary to take a step back, or to keep a strict watch for errors,
which, overlooked in the principles, may be detected in the arguments
themselves—in which case it may be requisite either to determine these
principles with greater strictness, or to change them entirely.

I divide all apodeictic propositions, whether demonstrable or
immediately certain, into dogmata and mathemata. A direct synthetical
proposition, based on conceptions, is a dogma; a proposition of the
same kind, based on the construction of conceptions, is a mathema.
Analytical judgements do not teach us any more about an object than
what was contained in the conception we had of it; because they do not
extend our cognition beyond our conception of an object, they merely
elucidate the conception. They cannot therefore be with propriety
termed dogmas. Of the two kinds of à priori synthetical propositions
above mentioned, only those which are employed in philosophy can,
according to the general mode of speech, bear this name; those of
arithmetic or geometry would not be rightly so denominated. Thus the
customary mode of speaking confirms the explanation given above, and
the conclusion arrived at, that only those judgements which are based
upon conceptions, not on the construction of conceptions, can be termed
dogmatical.

Thus, pure reason, in the sphere of speculation, does not contain a
single direct synthetical judgement based upon conceptions. By means of
ideas, it is, as we have shown, incapable of producing synthetical
judgements, which are objectively valid; by means of the conceptions of
the understanding, it establishes certain indubitable principles, not,
however, directly on the basis of conceptions, but only indirectly by
means of the relation of these conceptions to something of a purely
contingent nature, namely, possible experience. When experience is
presupposed, these principles are apodeictically certain, but in
themselves, and directly, they cannot even be cognized à priori. Thus
the given conceptions of cause and event will not be sufficient for the
demonstration of the proposition: Every event has a cause. For this
reason, it is not a dogma; although from another point of view, that of
experience, it is capable of being proved to demonstration. The proper
term for such a proposition is principle, and not theorem (although it
does require to be proved), because it possesses the remarkable
peculiarity of being the condition of the possibility of its own ground
of proof, that is, experience, and of forming a necessary
presupposition in all empirical observation.

If then, in the speculative sphere of pure reason, no dogmata are to be
found; all dogmatical methods, whether borrowed from mathematics, or
invented by philosophical thinkers, are alike inappropriate and
inefficient. They only serve to conceal errors and fallacies, and to
deceive philosophy, whose duty it is to see that reason pursues a safe
and straight path. A philosophical method may, however, be
systematical. For our reason is, subjectively considered, itself a
system, and, in the sphere of mere conceptions, a system of
investigation according to principles of unity, the material being
supplied by experience alone. But this is not the proper place for
discussing the peculiar method of transcendental philosophy, as our
present task is simply to examine whether our faculties are capable of
erecting an edifice on the basis of pure reason, and how far they may
proceed with the materials at their command.

Section II. The Discipline of Pure Reason in Polemics

Reason must be subject, in all its operations, to criticism, which must
always be permitted to exercise its functions without restraint;
otherwise its interests are imperilled and its influence obnoxious to
suspicion. There is nothing, however useful, however sacred it may be,
that can claim exemption from the searching examination of this supreme
tribunal, which has no respect of persons. The very existence of reason
depends upon this freedom; for the voice of reason is not that of a
dictatorial and despotic power, it is rather like the vote of the
citizens of a free state, every member of which must have the privilege
of giving free expression to his doubts, and possess even the right of
veto.

But while reason can never decline to submit itself to the tribunal of
criticism, it has not always cause to dread the judgement of this
court. Pure reason, however, when engaged in the sphere of dogmatism,
is not so thoroughly conscious of a strict observance of its highest
laws, as to appear before a higher judicial reason with perfect
confidence. On the contrary, it must renounce its magnificent
dogmatical pretensions in philosophy.

Very different is the case when it has to defend itself, not before a
judge, but against an equal. If dogmatical assertions are advanced on
the negative side, in opposition to those made by reason on the
positive side, its justification kat authrhopon is complete, although
the proof of its propositions is kat aletheian unsatisfactory.

By the polemic of pure reason I mean the defence of its propositions
made by reason, in opposition to the dogmatical counter-propositions
advanced by other parties. The question here is not whether its own
statements may not also be false; it merely regards the fact that
reason proves that the opposite cannot be established with
demonstrative certainty, nor even asserted with a higher degree of
probability. Reason does not hold her possessions upon sufferance; for,
although she cannot show a perfectly satisfactory title to them, no one
can prove that she is not the rightful possessor.

It is a melancholy reflection that reason, in its highest exercise,
falls into an antithetic; and that the supreme tribunal for the
settlement of differences should not be at union with itself. It is
true that we had to discuss the question of an apparent antithetic, but
we found that it was based upon a misconception. In conformity with the
common prejudice, phenomena were regarded as things in themselves, and
thus an absolute completeness in their synthesis was required in the
one mode or in the other (it was shown to be impossible in both); a
demand entirely out of place in regard to phenomena. There was, then,
no real self-contradiction of reason in the propositions: The series of
phenomena given in themselves has an absolutely first beginning; and:
This series is absolutely and in itself without beginning. The two
propositions are perfectly consistent with each other, because
phenomena as phenomena are in themselves nothing, and consequently the
hypothesis that they are things in themselves must lead to
self-contradictory inferences.

But there are cases in which a similar misunderstanding cannot be
provided against, and the dispute must remain unsettled. Take, for
example, the theistic proposition: There is a Supreme Being; and on the
other hand, the atheistic counter-statement: There exists no Supreme
Being; or, in psychology: Everything that thinks possesses the
attribute of absolute and permanent unity, which is utterly different
from the transitory unity of material phenomena; and the
counter-proposition: The soul is not an immaterial unity, and its
nature is transitory, like that of phenomena. The objects of these
questions contain no heterogeneous or contradictory elements, for they
relate to things in themselves, and not to phenomena. There would
arise, indeed, a real contradiction, if reason came forward with a
statement on the negative side of these questions alone. As regards the
criticism to which the grounds of proof on the affirmative side must be
subjected, it may be freely admitted, without necessitating the
surrender of the affirmative propositions, which have, at least, the
interest of reason in their favour—an advantage which the opposite
party cannot lay claim to.

I cannot agree with the opinion of several admirable thinkers—Sulzer
among the rest—that, in spite of the weakness of the arguments hitherto
in use, we may hope, one day, to see sufficient demonstrations of the
two cardinal propositions of pure reason—the existence of a Supreme
Being, and the immortality of the soul. I am certain, on the contrary,
that this will never be the case. For on what ground can reason base
such synthetical propositions, which do not relate to the objects of
experience and their internal possibility? But it is also
demonstratively certain that no one will ever be able to maintain the
contrary with the least show of probability. For, as he can attempt
such a proof solely upon the basis of pure reason, he is bound to prove
that a Supreme Being, and a thinking subject in the character of a pure
intelligence, are impossible. But where will he find the knowledge
which can enable him to enounce synthetical judgements in regard to
things which transcend the region of experience? We may, therefore,
rest assured that the opposite never will be demonstrated. We need not,
then, have recourse to scholastic arguments; we may always admit the
truth of those propositions which are consistent with the speculative
interests of reason in the sphere of experience, and form, moreover,
the only means of uniting the speculative with the practical interest.
Our opponent, who must not be considered here as a critic solely, we
can be ready to meet with a non liquet which cannot fail to disconcert
him; while we cannot deny his right to a similar retort, as we have on
our side the advantage of the support of the subjective maxim of
reason, and can therefore look upon all his sophistical arguments with
calm indifference.

From this point of view, there is properly no antithetic of pure
reason. For the only arena for such a struggle would be upon the field
of pure theology and psychology; but on this ground there can appear no
combatant whom we need to fear. Ridicule and boasting can be his only
weapons; and these may be laughed at, as mere child’s play. This
consideration restores to Reason her courage; for what source of
confidence could be found, if she, whose vocation it is to destroy
error, were at variance with herself and without any reasonable hope of
ever reaching a state of permanent repose?

Everything in nature is good for some purpose. Even poisons are
serviceable; they destroy the evil effects of other poisons generated
in our system, and must always find a place in every complete
pharmacopoeia. The objections raised against the fallacies and
sophistries of speculative reason, are objections given by the nature
of this reason itself, and must therefore have a destination and
purpose which can only be for the good of humanity. For what purpose
has Providence raised many objects, in which we have the deepest
interest, so far above us, that we vainly try to cognize them with
certainty, and our powers of mental vision are rather excited than
satisfied by the glimpses we may chance to seize? It is very doubtful
whether it is for our benefit to advance bold affirmations regarding
subjects involved in such obscurity; perhaps it would even be
detrimental to our best interests. But it is undoubtedly always
beneficial to leave the investigating, as well as the critical reason,
in perfect freedom, and permit it to take charge of its own interests,
which are advanced as much by its limitation, as by its extension of
its views, and which always suffer by the interference of foreign
powers forcing it, against its natural tendencies, to bend to certain
preconceived designs.

Allow your opponent to say what he thinks reasonable, and combat him
only with the weapons of reason. Have no anxiety for the practical
interests of humanity—these are never imperilled in a purely
speculative dispute. Such a dispute serves merely to disclose the
antinomy of reason, which, as it has its source in the nature of
reason, ought to be thoroughly investigated. Reason is benefited by the
examination of a subject on both sides, and its judgements are
corrected by being limited. It is not the matter that may give occasion
to dispute, but the manner. For it is perfectly permissible to employ,
in the presence of reason, the language of a firmly rooted faith, even
after we have been obliged to renounce all pretensions to knowledge.

If we were to ask the dispassionate David Hume—a philosopher endowed,
in a degree that few are, with a well-balanced judgement: What motive
induced you to spend so much labour and thought in undermining the
consoling and beneficial persuasion that reason is capable of assuring
us of the existence, and presenting us with a determinate conception of
a Supreme Being?—his answer would be: Nothing but the desire of
teaching reason to know its own powers better, and, at the same time, a
dislike of the procedure by which that faculty was compelled to support
foregone conclusions, and prevented from confessing the internal
weaknesses which it cannot but feel when it enters upon a rigid
self-examination. If, on the other hand, we were to ask Priestley—a
philosopher who had no taste for transcendental speculation, but was
entirely devoted to the principles of empiricism—what his motives were
for overturning those two main pillars of religion—the doctrines of the
freedom of the will and the immortality of the soul (in his view the
hope of a future life is but the expectation of the miracle of
resurrection)—this philosopher, himself a zealous and pious teacher of
religion, could give no other answer than this: I acted in the interest
of reason, which always suffers, when certain objects are explained and
judged by a reference to other supposed laws than those of material
nature—the only laws which we know in a determinate manner. It would be
unfair to decry the latter philosopher, who endeavoured to harmonize
his paradoxical opinions with the interests of religion, and to
undervalue an honest and reflecting man, because he finds himself at a
loss the moment he has left the field of natural science. The same
grace must be accorded to Hume, a man not less well-disposed, and quite
as blameless in his moral character, and who pushed his abstract
speculations to an extreme length, because, as he rightly believed, the
object of them lies entirely beyond the bounds of natural science, and
within the sphere of pure ideas.

What is to be done to provide against the danger which seems in the
present case to menace the best interests of humanity? The course to be
pursued in reference to this subject is a perfectly plain and natural
one. Let each thinker pursue his own path; if he shows talent, if he
gives evidence of profound thought, in one word, if he shows that he
possesses the power of reasoning—reason is always the gainer. If you
have recourse to other means, if you attempt to coerce reason, if you
raise the cry of treason to humanity, if you excite the feelings of the
crowd, which can neither understand nor sympathize with such subtle
speculations—you will only make yourselves ridiculous. For the question
does not concern the advantage or disadvantage which we are expected to
reap from such inquiries; the question is merely how far reason can
advance in the field of speculation, apart from all kinds of interest,
and whether we may depend upon the exertions of speculative reason, or
must renounce all reliance on it. Instead of joining the combatants, it
is your part to be a tranquil spectator of the struggle—a laborious
struggle for the parties engaged, but attended, in its progress as well
as in its result, with the most advantageous consequences for the
interests of thought and knowledge. It is absurd to expect to be
enlightened by Reason, and at the same time to prescribe to her what
side of the question she must adopt. Moreover, reason is sufficiently
held in check by its own power, the limits imposed on it by its own
nature are sufficient; it is unnecessary for you to place over it
additional guards, as if its power were dangerous to the constitution
of the intellectual state. In the dialectic of reason there is no
victory gained which need in the least disturb your tranquility.

The strife of dialectic is a necessity of reason, and we cannot but
wish that it had been conducted long ere this with that perfect freedom
which ought to be its essential condition. In this case, we should have
had at an earlier period a matured and profound criticism, which must
have put an end to all dialectical disputes, by exposing the illusions
and prejudices in which they originated.

There is in human nature an unworthy propensity—a propensity which,
like everything that springs from nature, must in its final purpose be
conducive to the good of humanity—to conceal our real sentiments, and
to give expression only to certain received opinions, which are
regarded as at once safe and promotive of the common good. It is true,
this tendency, not only to conceal our real sentiments, but to profess
those which may gain us favour in the eyes of society, has not only
civilized, but, in a certain measure, moralized us; as no one can break
through the outward covering of respectability, honour, and morality,
and thus the seemingly-good examples which we see around us form an
excellent school for moral improvement, so long as our belief in their
genuineness remains unshaken. But this disposition to represent
ourselves as better than we are, and to utter opinions which are not
our own, can be nothing more than a kind of provisionary arrangement of
nature to lead us from the rudeness of an uncivilized state, and to
teach us how to assume at least the appearance and manner of the good
we see. But when true principles have been developed, and have obtained
a sure foundation in our habit of thought, this conventionalism must be
attacked with earnest vigour, otherwise it corrupts the heart, and
checks the growth of good dispositions with the mischievous weed of
fair appearances.

I am sorry to remark the same tendency to misrepresentation and
hypocrisy in the sphere of speculative discussion, where there is less
temptation to restrain the free expression of thought. For what can be
more prejudicial to the interests of intelligence than to falsify our
real sentiments, to conceal the doubts which we feel in regard to our
statements, or to maintain the validity of grounds of proof which we
well know to be insufficient? So long as mere personal vanity is the
source of these unworthy artifices—and this is generally the case in
speculative discussions, which are mostly destitute of practical
interest, and are incapable of complete demonstration—the vanity of the
opposite party exaggerates as much on the other side; and thus the
result is the same, although it is not brought about so soon as if the
dispute had been conducted in a sincere and upright spirit. But where
the mass entertains the notion that the aim of certain subtle
speculators is nothing less than to shake the very foundations of
public welfare and morality—it seems not only prudent, but even praise
worthy, to maintain the good cause by illusory arguments, rather than
to give to our supposed opponents the advantage of lowering our
declarations to the moderate tone of a merely practical conviction, and
of compelling us to confess our inability to attain to apodeictic
certainty in speculative subjects. But we ought to reflect that there
is nothing, in the world more fatal to the maintenance of a good cause
than deceit, misrepresentation, and falsehood. That the strictest laws
of honesty should be observed in the discussion of a purely speculative
subject is the least requirement that can be made. If we could reckon
with security even upon so little, the conflict of speculative reason
regarding the important questions of God, immortality, and freedom,
would have been either decided long ago, or would very soon be brought
to a conclusion. But, in general, the uprightness of the defence stands
in an inverse ratio to the goodness of the cause; and perhaps more
honesty and fairness are shown by those who deny than by those who
uphold these doctrines.

I shall persuade myself, then, that I have readers who do not wish to
see a righteous cause defended by unfair arguments. Such will now
recognize the fact that, according to the principles of this Critique,
if we consider not what is, but what ought to be the case, there can be
really no polemic of pure reason. For how can two persons dispute about
a thing, the reality of which neither can present in actual or even in
possible experience? Each adopts the plan of meditating on his idea for
the purpose of drawing from the idea, if he can, what is more than the
idea, that is, the reality of the object which it indicates. How shall
they settle the dispute, since neither is able to make his assertions
directly comprehensible and certain, but must restrict himself to
attacking and confuting those of his opponent? All statements enounced
by pure reason transcend the conditions of possible experience, beyond
the sphere of which we can discover no criterion of truth, while they
are at the same time framed in accordance with the laws of the
understanding, which are applicable only to experience; and thus it is
the fate of all such speculative discussions that while the one party
attacks the weaker side of his opponent, he infallibly lays open his
own weaknesses.

The critique of pure reason may be regarded as the highest tribunal for
all speculative disputes; for it is not involved in these disputes,
which have an immediate relation to certain objects and not to the laws
of the mind, but is instituted for the purpose of determining the
rights and limits of reason.

Without the control of criticism, reason is, as it were, in a state of
nature, and can only establish its claims and assertions by war.
Criticism, on the contrary, deciding all questions according to the
fundamental laws of its own institution, secures to us the peace of law
and order, and enables us to discuss all differences in the more
tranquil manner of a legal process. In the former case, disputes are
ended by victory, which both sides may claim and which is followed by a
hollow armistice; in the latter, by a sentence, which, as it strikes at
the root of all speculative differences, ensures to all concerned a
lasting peace. The endless disputes of a dogmatizing reason compel us
to look for some mode of arriving at a settled decision by a critical
investigation of reason itself; just as Hobbes maintains that the state
of nature is a state of injustice and violence, and that we must leave
it and submit ourselves to the constraint of law, which indeed limits
individual freedom, but only that it may consist with the freedom of
others and with the common good of all.

This freedom will, among other things, permit of our openly stating the
difficulties and doubts which we are ourselves unable to solve, without
being decried on that account as turbulent and dangerous citizens. This
privilege forms part of the native rights of human reason, which
recognizes no other judge than the universal reason of humanity; and as
this reason is the source of all progress and improvement, such a
privilege is to be held sacred and inviolable. It is unwise, moreover,
to denounce as dangerous any bold assertions against, or rash attacks
upon, an opinion which is held by the largest and most moral class of
the community; for that would be giving them an importance which they
do not deserve. When I hear that the freedom of the will, the hope of a
future life, and the existence of God have been overthrown by the
arguments of some able writer, I feel a strong desire to read his book;
for I expect that he will add to my knowledge and impart greater
clearness and distinctness to my views by the argumentative power shown
in his writings. But I am perfectly certain, even before I have opened
the book, that he has not succeeded in a single point, not because I
believe I am in possession of irrefutable demonstrations of these
important propositions, but because this transcendental critique, which
has disclosed to me the power and the limits of pure reason, has fully
convinced me that, as it is insufficient to establish the affirmative,
it is as powerless, and even more so, to assure us of the truth of the
negative answer to these questions. From what source does this
free-thinker derive his knowledge that there is, for example, no
Supreme Being? This proposition lies out of the field of possible
experience, and, therefore, beyond the limits of human cognition. But I
would not read at, all the answer which the dogmatical maintainer of
the good cause makes to his opponent, because I know well beforehand,
that he will merely attack the fallacious grounds of his adversary,
without being able to establish his own assertions. Besides, a new
illusory argument, in the construction of which talent and acuteness
are shown, is suggestive of new ideas and new trains of reasoning, and
in this respect the old and everyday sophistries are quite useless.
Again, the dogmatical opponent of religion gives employment to
criticism, and enables us to test and correct its principles, while
there is no occasion for anxiety in regard to the influence and results
of his reasoning.

But, it will be said, must we not warn the youth entrusted to
academical care against such writings, must we not preserve them from
the knowledge of these dangerous assertions, until their judgement is
ripened, or rather until the doctrines which we wish to inculcate are
so firmly rooted in their minds as to withstand all attempts at
instilling the contrary dogmas, from whatever quarter they may come?

If we are to confine ourselves to the dogmatical procedure in the
sphere of pure reason, and find ourselves unable to settle such
disputes otherwise than by becoming a party in them, and setting
counter-assertions against the statements advanced by our opponents,
there is certainly no plan more advisable for the moment, but, at the
same time, none more absurd and inefficient for the future, than this
retaining of the youthful mind under guardianship for a time, and thus
preserving it—for so long at least—from seduction into error. But when,
at a later period, either curiosity, or the prevalent fashion of
thought places such writings in their hands, will the so-called
convictions of their youth stand firm? The young thinker, who has in
his armoury none but dogmatical weapons with which to resist the
attacks of his opponent, and who cannot detect the latent dialectic
which lies in his own opinions as well as in those of the opposite
party, sees the advance of illusory arguments and grounds of proof
which have the advantage of novelty, against as illusory grounds of
proof destitute of this advantage, and which, perhaps, excite the
suspicion that the natural credulity of his youth has been abused by
his instructors. He thinks he can find no better means of showing that
he has out grown the discipline of his minority than by despising those
well-meant warnings, and, knowing no system of thought but that of
dogmatism, he drinks deep draughts of the poison that is to sap the
principles in which his early years were trained.

Exactly the opposite of the system here recommended ought to be pursued
in academical instruction. This can only be effected, however, by a
thorough training in the critical investigation of pure reason. For, in
order to bring the principles of this critique into exercise as soon as
possible, and to demonstrate their perfect even in the presence of the
highest degree of dialectical illusion, the student ought to examine
the assertions made on both sides of speculative questions step by
step, and to test them by these principles. It cannot be a difficult
task for him to show the fallacies inherent in these propositions, and
thus he begins early to feel his own power of securing himself against
the influence of such sophistical arguments, which must finally lose,
for him, all their illusory power. And, although the same blows which
overturn the edifice of his opponent are as fatal to his own
speculative structures, if such he has wished to rear; he need not feel
any sorrow in regard to this seeming misfortune, as he has now before
him a fair prospect into the practical region in which he may
reasonably hope to find a more secure foundation for a rational system.

There is, accordingly, no proper polemic in the sphere of pure reason.
Both parties beat the air and fight with their own shadows, as they
pass beyond the limits of nature, and can find no tangible point of
attack—no firm footing for their dogmatical conflict. Fight as
vigorously as they may, the shadows which they hew down, immediately
start up again, like the heroes in Walhalla, and renew the bloodless
and unceasing contest.

But neither can we admit that there is any proper sceptical employment
of pure reason, such as might be based upon the principle of neutrality
in all speculative disputes. To excite reason against itself, to place
weapons in the hands of the party on the one side as well as in those
of the other, and to remain an undisturbed and sarcastic spectator of
the fierce struggle that ensues, seems, from the dogmatical point of
view, to be a part fitting only a malevolent disposition. But, when the
sophist evidences an invincible obstinacy and blindness, and a pride
which no criticism can moderate, there is no other practicable course
than to oppose to this pride and obstinacy similar feelings and
pretensions on the other side, equally well or ill founded, so that
reason, staggered by the reflections thus forced upon it, finds it
necessary to moderate its confidence in such pretensions and to listen
to the advice of criticism. But we cannot stop at these doubts, much
less regard the conviction of our ignorance, not only as a cure for the
conceit natural to dogmatism, but as the settlement of the disputes in
which reason is involved with itself. On the contrary, scepticism is
merely a means of awakening reason from its dogmatic dreams and
exciting it to a more careful investigation into its own powers and
pretensions. But, as scepticism appears to be the shortest road to a
permanent peace in the domain of philosophy, and as it is the track
pursued by the many who aim at giving a philosophical colouring to
their contemptuous dislike of all inquiries of this kind, I think it
necessary to present to my readers this mode of thought in its true
light.

_Scepticism not a Permanent State for Human Reason._

The consciousness of ignorance—unless this ignorance is recognized to
be absolutely necessary ought, instead of forming the conclusion of my
inquiries, to be the strongest motive to the pursuit of them. All
ignorance is either ignorance of things or of the limits of knowledge.
If my ignorance is accidental and not necessary, it must incite me, in
the first case, to a dogmatical inquiry regarding the objects of which
I am ignorant; in the second, to a critical investigation into the
bounds of all possible knowledge. But that my ignorance is absolutely
necessary and unavoidable, and that it consequently absolves from the
duty of all further investigation, is a fact which cannot be made out
upon empirical grounds—from observation—but upon critical grounds
alone, that is, by a thoroughgoing investigation into the primary
sources of cognition. It follows that the determination of the bounds
of reason can be made only on à priori grounds; while the empirical
limitation of reason, which is merely an indeterminate cognition of an
ignorance that can never be completely removed, can take place only à
posteriori. In other words, our empirical knowledge is limited by that
which yet remains for us to know. The former cognition of our
ignorance, which is possible only on a rational basis, is a science;
the latter is merely a perception, and we cannot say how far the
inferences drawn from it may extend. If I regard the earth, as it
really appears to my senses, as a flat surface, I am ignorant how far
this surface extends. But experience teaches me that, how far soever I
go, I always see before me a space in which I can proceed farther; and
thus I know the limits—merely visual—of my actual knowledge of the
earth, although I am ignorant of the limits of the earth itself. But if
I have got so far as to know that the earth is a sphere, and that its
surface is spherical, I can cognize à priori and determine upon
principles, from my knowledge of a small part of this surface—say to
the extent of a degree—the diameter and circumference of the earth; and
although I am ignorant of the objects which this surface contains, I
have a perfect knowledge of its limits and extent.

The sum of all the possible objects of our cognition seems to us to be
a level surface, with an apparent horizon—that which forms the limit of
its extent, and which has been termed by us the idea of unconditioned
totality. To reach this limit by empirical means is impossible, and all
attempts to determine it à priori according to a principle, are alike
in vain. But all the questions raised by pure reason relate to that
which lies beyond this horizon, or, at least, in its boundary line.

The celebrated David Hume was one of those geographers of human reason
who believe that they have given a sufficient answer to all such
questions by declaring them to lie beyond the horizon of our
knowledge—a horizon which, however, Hume was unable to determine. His
attention especially was directed to the principle of causality; and he
remarked with perfect justice that the truth of this principle, and
even the objective validity of the conception of a cause, was not
commonly based upon clear insight, that is, upon à priori cognition.
Hence he concluded that this law does not derive its authority from its
universality and necessity, but merely from its general applicability
in the course of experience, and a kind of subjective necessity thence
arising, which he termed habit. From the inability of reason to
establish this principle as a necessary law for the acquisition of all
experience, he inferred the nullity of all the attempts of reason to
pass the region of the empirical.

This procedure of subjecting the facta of reason to examination, and,
if necessary, to disapproval, may be termed the censura of reason. This
censura must inevitably lead us to doubts regarding all transcendent
employment of principles. But this is only the second step in our
inquiry. The first step in regard to the subjects of pure reason, and
which marks the infancy of that faculty, is that of dogmatism. The
second, which we have just mentioned, is that of scepticism, and it
gives evidence that our judgement has been improved by experience. But
a third step is necessary—indicative of the maturity and manhood of the
judgement, which now lays a firm foundation upon universal and
necessary principles. This is the period of criticism, in which we do
not examine the facta of reason, but reason itself, in the whole extent
of its powers, and in regard to its capability of à priori cognition;
and thus we determine not merely the empirical and ever-shifting bounds
of our knowledge, but its necessary and eternal limits. We demonstrate
from indubitable principles, not merely our ignorance in respect to
this or that subject, but in regard to all possible questions of a
certain class. Thus scepticism is a resting place for reason, in which
it may reflect on its dogmatical wanderings and gain some knowledge of
the region in which it happens to be, that it may pursue its way with
greater certainty; but it cannot be its permanent dwelling-place. It
must take up its abode only in the region of complete certitude,
whether this relates to the cognition of objects themselves, or to the
limits which bound all our cognition.

Reason is not to be considered as an indefinitely extended plane, of
the bounds of which we have only a general knowledge; it ought rather
to be compared to a sphere, the radius of which may be found from the
curvature of its surface—that is, the nature of à priori synthetical
propositions—and, consequently, its circumference and extent. Beyond
the sphere of experience there are no objects which it can cognize;
nay, even questions regarding such supposititious objects relate only
to the subjective principles of a complete determination of the
relations which exist between the understanding-conceptions which lie
within this sphere.

We are actually in possession of à priori synthetical cognitions, as is
proved by the existence of the principles of the understanding, which
anticipate experience. If any one cannot comprehend the possibility of
these principles, he may have some reason to doubt whether they are
really à priori; but he cannot on this account declare them to be
impossible, and affirm the nullity of the steps which reason may have
taken under their guidance. He can only say: If we perceived their
origin and their authenticity, we should be able to determine the
extent and limits of reason; but, till we can do this, all propositions
regarding the latter are mere random assertions. In this view, the
doubt respecting all dogmatical philosophy, which proceeds without the
guidance of criticism, is well grounded; but we cannot therefore deny
to reason the ability to construct a sound philosophy, when the way has
been prepared by a thorough critical investigation. All the conceptions
produced, and all the questions raised, by pure reason, do not lie in
the sphere of experience, but in that of reason itself, and hence they
must be solved, and shown to be either valid or inadmissible, by that
faculty. We have no right to decline the solution of such problems, on
the ground that the solution can be discovered only from the nature of
things, and under pretence of the limitation of human faculties, for
reason is the sole creator of all these ideas, and is therefore bound
either to establish their validity or to expose their illusory nature.

The polemic of scepticism is properly directed against the dogmatist,
who erects a system of philosophy without having examined the
fundamental objective principles on which it is based, for the purpose
of evidencing the futility of his designs, and thus bringing him to a
knowledge of his own powers. But, in itself, scepticism does not give
us any certain information in regard to the bounds of our knowledge.
All unsuccessful dogmatical attempts of reason are facia, which it is
always useful to submit to the censure of the sceptic. But this cannot
help us to any decision regarding the expectations which reason
cherishes of better success in future endeavours; the investigations of
scepticism cannot, therefore, settle the dispute regarding the rights
and powers of human reason.

Hume is perhaps the ablest and most ingenious of all sceptical
philosophers, and his writings have, undoubtedly, exerted the most
powerful influence in awakening reason to a thorough investigation into
its own powers. It will, therefore, well repay our labours to consider
for a little the course of reasoning which he followed and the errors
into which he strayed, although setting out on the path of truth and
certitude.

Hume was probably aware, although he never clearly developed the
notion, that we proceed in judgements of a certain class beyond our
conception of the object. I have termed this kind of judgement
synthetical. As regard the manner in which I pass beyond my conception
by the aid of experience, no doubts can be entertained. Experience is
itself a synthesis of perceptions; and it employs perceptions to
increment the conception, which I obtain by means of another
perception. But we feel persuaded that we are able to proceed beyond a
conception, and to extend our cognition à priori. We attempt this in
two ways—either, through the pure understanding, in relation to that
which may become an object of experience, or, through pure reason, in
relation to such properties of things, or of the existence of things,
as can never be presented in any experience. This sceptical philosopher
did not distinguish these two kinds of judgements, as he ought to have
done, but regarded this augmentation of conceptions, and, if we may so
express ourselves, the spontaneous generation of understanding and
reason, independently of the impregnation of experience, as altogether
impossible. The so-called à priori principles of these faculties he
consequently held to be invalid and imaginary, and regarded them as
nothing but subjective habits of thought originating in experience, and
therefore purely empirical and contingent rules, to which we attribute
a spurious necessity and universality. In support of this strange
assertion, he referred us to the generally acknowledged principle of
the relation between cause and effect. No faculty of the mind can
conduct us from the conception of a thing to the existence of something
else; and hence he believed he could infer that, without experience, we
possess no source from which we can augment a conception, and no ground
sufficient to justify us in framing a judgement that is to extend our
cognition à priori. That the light of the sun, which shines upon a
piece of wax, at the same time melts it, while it hardens clay, no
power of the understanding could infer from the conceptions which we
previously possessed of these substances; much less is there any à
priori law that could conduct us to such a conclusion, which experience
alone can certify. On the other hand, we have seen in our discussion of
transcendental logic, that, although we can never proceed immediately
beyond the content of the conception which is given us, we can always
cognize completely à priori—in relation, however, to a third term,
namely, possible experience—the law of its connection with other
things. For example, if I observe that a piece of wax melts, I can
cognize à priori that there must have been something (the sun’s heat)
preceding, which this law; although, without the aid of experience, I
could not cognize à priori and in a determinate manner either the cause
from the effect, or the effect from the cause. Hume was, therefore,
wrong in inferring, from the contingency of the determination according
to law, the contingency of the law itself; and the passing beyond the
conception of a thing to possible experience (which is an à priori
proceeding, constituting the objective reality of the conception), he
confounded with our synthesis of objects in actual experience, which is
always, of course, empirical. Thus, too, he regarded the principle of
affinity, which has its seat in the understanding and indicates a
necessary connection, as a mere rule of association, lying in the
imitative faculty of imagination, which can present only contingent,
and not objective connections.

The sceptical errors of this remarkably acute thinker arose principally
from a defect, which was common to him with the dogmatists, namely,
that he had never made a systematic review of all the different kinds
of à priori synthesis performed by the understanding. Had he done so,
he would have found, to take one example among many, that the principle
of permanence was of this character, and that it, as well as the
principle of causality, anticipates experience. In this way he might
have been able to describe the determinate limits of the à priori
operations of understanding and reason. But he merely declared the
understanding to be limited, instead of showing what its limits were;
he created a general mistrust in the power of our faculties, without
giving us any determinate knowledge of the bounds of our necessary and
unavoidable ignorance; he examined and condemned some of the principles
of the understanding, without investigating all its powers with the
completeness necessary to criticism. He denies, with truth, certain
powers to the understanding, but he goes further, and declares it to be
utterly inadequate to the à priori extension of knowledge, although he
has not fully examined all the powers which reside in the faculty; and
thus the fate which always overtakes scepticism meets him too. That is
to say, his own declarations are doubted, for his objections were based
upon facta, which are contingent, and not upon principles, which can
alone demonstrate the necessary invalidity of all dogmatical
assertions.

As Hume makes no distinction between the well-grounded claims of the
understanding and the dialectical pretensions of reason, against which,
however, his attacks are mainly directed, reason does not feel itself
shut out from all attempts at the extension of à priori cognition, and
hence it refuses, in spite of a few checks in this or that quarter, to
relinquish such efforts. For one naturally arms oneself to resist an
attack, and becomes more obstinate in the resolve to establish the
claims he has advanced. But a complete review of the powers of reason,
and the conviction thence arising that we are in possession of a
limited field of action, while we must admit the vanity of higher
claims, puts an end to all doubt and dispute, and induces reason to
rest satisfied with the undisturbed possession of its limited domain.

To the uncritical dogmatist, who has not surveyed the sphere of his
understanding, nor determined, in accordance with principles, the
limits of possible cognition, who, consequently, is ignorant of his own
powers, and believes he will discover them by the attempts he makes in
the field of cognition, these attacks of scepticism are not only
dangerous, but destructive. For if there is one proposition in his
chain of reasoning which he cannot prove, or the fallacy in which he
cannot evolve in accordance with a principle, suspicion falls on all
his statements, however plausible they may appear.

And thus scepticism, the bane of dogmatical philosophy, conducts us to
a sound investigation into the understanding and the reason. When we
are thus far advanced, we need fear no further attacks; for the limits
of our domain are clearly marked out, and we can make no claims nor
become involved in any disputes regarding the region that lies beyond
these limits. Thus the sceptical procedure in philosophy does not
present any solution of the problems of reason, but it forms an
excellent exercise for its powers, awakening its circumspection, and
indicating the means whereby it may most fully establish its claims to
its legitimate possessions.

Section III. The Discipline of Pure Reason in Hypothesis

This critique of reason has now taught us that all its efforts to
extend the bounds of knowledge, by means of pure speculation, are
utterly fruitless. So much the wider field, it may appear, lies open to
hypothesis; as, where we cannot know with certainty, we are at liberty
to make guesses and to form suppositions.

Imagination may be allowed, under the strict surveillance of reason, to
invent suppositions; but, these must be based on something that is
perfectly certain—and that is the possibility of the object. If we are
well assured upon this point, it is allowable to have recourse to
supposition in regard to the reality of the object; but this
supposition must, unless it is utterly groundless, be connected, as its
ground of explanation, with that which is really given and absolutely
certain. Such a supposition is termed a hypothesis.

It is beyond our power to form the least conception à priori of the
possibility of dynamical connection in phenomena; and the category of
the pure understanding will not enable us to excogitate any such
connection, but merely helps us to understand it, when we meet with it
in experience. For this reason we cannot, in accordance with the
categories, imagine or invent any object or any property of an object
not given, or that may not be given in experience, and employ it in a
hypothesis; otherwise, we should be basing our chain of reasoning upon
mere chimerical fancies, and not upon conceptions of things. Thus, we
have no right to assume the existence of new powers, not existing in
nature—for example, an understanding with a non-sensuous intuition, a
force of attraction without contact, or some new kind of substances
occupying space, and yet without the property of impenetrability—and,
consequently, we cannot assume that there is any other kind of
community among substances than that observable in experience, any kind
of presence than that in space, or any kind of duration than that in
time. In one word, the conditions of possible experience are for reason
the only conditions of the possibility of things; reason cannot venture
to form, independently of these conditions, any conceptions of things,
because such conceptions, although not self-contradictory, are without
object and without application.

The conceptions of reason are, as we have already shown, mere ideas,
and do not relate to any object in any kind of experience. At the same
time, they do not indicate imaginary or possible objects. They are
purely problematical in their nature and, as aids to the heuristic
exercise of the faculties, form the basis of the regulative principles
for the systematic employment of the understanding in the field of
experience. If we leave this ground of experience, they become mere
fictions of thought, the possibility of which is quite indemonstrable;
and they cannot, consequently, be employed as hypotheses in the
explanation of real phenomena. It is quite admissible to cogitate the
soul as simple, for the purpose of enabling ourselves to employ the
idea of a perfect and necessary unity of all the faculties of the mind
as the principle of all our inquiries into its internal phenomena,
although we cannot cognize this unity in concreto. But to assume that
the soul is a simple substance (a transcendental conception) would be
enouncing a proposition which is not only indemonstrable—as many
physical hypotheses are—but a proposition which is purely arbitrary,
and in the highest degree rash. The simple is never presented in
experience; and, if by substance is here meant the permanent object of
sensuous intuition, the possibility of a simple phenomenon is perfectly
inconceivable. Reason affords no good grounds for admitting the
existence of intelligible beings, or of intelligible properties of
sensuous things, although—as we have no conception either of their
possibility or of their impossibility—it will always be out of our
power to affirm dogmatically that they do not exist. In the explanation
of given phenomena, no other things and no other grounds of explanation
can be employed than those which stand in connection with the given
phenomena according to the known laws of experience. A transcendental
hypothesis, in which a mere idea of reason is employed to explain the
phenomena of nature, would not give us any better insight into a
phenomenon, as we should be trying to explain what we do not
sufficiently understand from known empirical principles, by what we do
not understand at all. The principles of such a hypothesis might
conduce to the satisfaction of reason, but it would not assist the
understanding in its application to objects. Order and conformity to
aims in the sphere of nature must be themselves explained upon natural
grounds and according to natural laws; and the wildest hypotheses, if
they are only physical, are here more admissible than a hyperphysical
hypothesis, such as that of a divine author. For such a hypothesis
would introduce the principle of ignava ratio, which requires us to
give up the search for causes that might be discovered in the course of
experience and to rest satisfied with a mere idea. As regards the
absolute totality of the grounds of explanation in the series of these
causes, this can be no hindrance to the understanding in the case of
phenomena; because, as they are to us nothing more than phenomena, we
have no right to look for anything like completeness in the synthesis
of the series of their conditions.

Transcendental hypotheses are therefore inadmissible; and we cannot use
the liberty of employing, in the absence of physical, hyperphysical
grounds of explanation. And this for two reasons; first, because such
hypothesis do not advance reason, but rather stop it in its progress;
secondly, because this licence would render fruitless all its exertions
in its own proper sphere, which is that of experience. For, when the
explanation of natural phenomena happens to be difficult, we have
constantly at hand a transcendental ground of explanation, which lifts
us above the necessity of investigating nature; and our inquiries are
brought to a close, not because we have obtained all the requisite
knowledge, but because we abut upon a principle which is
incomprehensible and which, indeed, is so far back in the track of
thought as to contain the conception of the absolutely primal being.

The next requisite for the admissibility of a hypothesis is its
sufficiency. That is, it must determine à priori the consequences which
are given in experience and which are supposed to follow from the
hypothesis itself. If we require to employ auxiliary hypotheses, the
suspicion naturally arises that they are mere fictions; because the
necessity for each of them requires the same justification as in the
case of the original hypothesis, and thus their testimony is invalid.
If we suppose the existence of an infinitely perfect cause, we possess
sufficient grounds for the explanation of the conformity to aims, the
order and the greatness which we observe in the universe; but we find
ourselves obliged, when we observe the evil in the world and the
exceptions to these laws, to employ new hypothesis in support of the
original one. We employ the idea of the simple nature of the human soul
as the foundation of all the theories we may form of its phenomena; but
when we meet with difficulties in our way, when we observe in the soul
phenomena similar to the changes which take place in matter, we require
to call in new auxiliary hypotheses. These may, indeed, not be false,
but we do not know them to be true, because the only witness to their
certitude is the hypothesis which they themselves have been called in
to explain.

We are not discussing the above-mentioned assertions regarding the
immaterial unity of the soul and the existence of a Supreme Being as
dogmata, which certain philosophers profess to demonstrate à priori,
but purely as hypotheses. In the former case, the dogmatist must take
care that his arguments possess the apodeictic certainty of a
demonstration. For the assertion that the reality of such ideas is
probable is as absurd as a proof of the probability of a proposition in
geometry. Pure abstract reason, apart from all experience, can either
cognize nothing at all; and hence the judgements it enounces are never
mere opinions, they are either apodeictic certainties, or declarations
that nothing can be known on the subject. Opinions and probable
judgements on the nature of things can only be employed to explain
given phenomena, or they may relate to the effect, in accordance with
empirical laws, of an actually existing cause. In other words, we must
restrict the sphere of opinion to the world of experience and nature.
Beyond this region opinion is mere invention; unless we are groping
about for the truth on a path not yet fully known, and have some hopes
of stumbling upon it by chance.

But, although hypotheses are inadmissible in answers to the questions
of pure speculative reason, they may be employed in the defence of
these answers. That is to say, hypotheses are admissible in polemic,
but not in the sphere of dogmatism. By the defence of statements of
this character, I do not mean an attempt at discovering new grounds for
their support, but merely the refutation of the arguments of opponents.
All à priori synthetical propositions possess the peculiarity that,
although the philosopher who maintains the reality of the ideas
contained in the proposition is not in possession of sufficient
knowledge to establish the certainty of his statements, his opponent is
as little able to prove the truth of the opposite. This equality of
fortune does not allow the one party to be superior to the other in the
sphere of speculative cognition; and it is this sphere, accordingly,
that is the proper arena of these endless speculative conflicts. But we
shall afterwards show that, in relation to its practical exercise,
Reason has the right of admitting what, in the field of pure
speculation, she would not be justified in supposing, except upon
perfectly sufficient grounds; because all such suppositions destroy the
necessary completeness of speculation—a condition which the practical
reason, however, does not consider to be requisite. In this sphere,
therefore, Reason is mistress of a possession, her title to which she
does not require to prove—which, in fact, she could not do. The burden
of proof accordingly rests upon the opponent. But as he has just as
little knowledge regarding the subject discussed, and is as little able
to prove the non-existence of the object of an idea, as the philosopher
on the other side is to demonstrate its reality, it is evident that
there is an advantage on the side of the philosopher who maintains his
proposition as a practically necessary supposition (melior est conditio
possidentis). For he is at liberty to employ, in self-defence, the same
weapons as his opponent makes use of in attacking him; that is, he has
a right to use hypotheses not for the purpose of supporting the
arguments in favour of his own propositions, but to show that his
opponent knows no more than himself regarding the subject under
discussion and cannot boast of any speculative advantage.

Hypotheses are, therefore, admissible in the sphere of pure reason only
as weapons for self-defence, and not as supports to dogmatical
assertions. But the opposing party we must always seek for in
ourselves. For speculative reason is, in the sphere of
transcendentalism, dialectical in its own nature. The difficulties and
objections we have to fear lie in ourselves. They are like old but
never superannuated claims; and we must seek them out, and settle them
once and for ever, if we are to expect a permanent peace. External
tranquility is hollow and unreal. The root of these contradictions,
which lies in the nature of human reason, must be destroyed; and this
can only be done by giving it, in the first instance, freedom to grow,
nay, by nourishing it, that it may send out shoots, and thus betray its
own existence. It is our duty, therefore, to try to discover new
objections, to put weapons in the bands of our opponent, and to grant
him the most favourable position in the arena that he can wish. We have
nothing to fear from these concessions; on the contrary, we may rather
hope that we shall thus make ourselves master of a possession which no
one will ever venture to dispute.

The thinker requires, to be fully equipped, the hypotheses of pure
reason, which, although but leaden weapons (for they have not been
steeled in the armoury of experience), are as useful as any that can be
employed by his opponents. If, accordingly, we have assumed, from a
non-speculative point of view, the immaterial nature of the soul, and
are met by the objection that experience seems to prove that the growth
and decay of our mental faculties are mere modifications of the
sensuous organism—we can weaken the force of this objection by the
assumption that the body is nothing but the fundamental phenomenon, to
which, as a necessary condition, all sensibility, and consequently all
thought, relates in the present state of our existence; and that the
separation of soul and body forms the conclusion of the sensuous
exercise of our power of cognition and the beginning of the
intellectual. The body would, in this view of the question, be
regarded, not as the cause of thought, but merely as its restrictive
condition, as promotive of the sensuous and animal, but as a hindrance
to the pure and spiritual life; and the dependence of the animal life
on the constitution of the body, would not prove that the whole life of
man was also dependent on the state of the organism. We might go still
farther, and discover new objections, or carry out to their extreme
consequences those which have already been adduced.

Generation, in the human race as well as among the irrational animals,
depends on so many accidents—of occasion, of proper sustenance, of the
laws enacted by the government of a country of vice even, that it is
difficult to believe in the eternal existence of a being whose life has
begun under circumstances so mean and trivial, and so entirely
dependent upon our own control. As regards the continuance of the
existence of the whole race, we need have no difficulties, for accident
in single cases is subject to general laws; but, in the case of each
individual, it would seem as if we could hardly expect so wonderful an
effect from causes so insignificant. But, in answer to these
objections, we may adduce the transcendental hypothesis that all life
is properly intelligible, and not subject to changes of time, and that
it neither began in birth, nor will end in death. We may assume that
this life is nothing more than a sensuous representation of pure
spiritual life; that the whole world of sense is but an image, hovering
before the faculty of cognition which we exercise in this sphere, and
with no more objective reality than a dream; and that if we could
intuite ourselves and other things as they really are, we should see
ourselves in a world of spiritual natures, our connection with which
did not begin at our birth and will not cease with the destruction of
the body. And so on.

We cannot be said to know what has been above asserted, nor do we
seriously maintain the truth of these assertions; and the notions
therein indicated are not even ideas of reason, they are purely
fictitious conceptions. But this hypothetical procedure is in perfect
conformity with the laws of reason. Our opponent mistakes the absence
of empirical conditions for a proof of the complete impossibility of
all that we have asserted; and we have to show him that he has not
exhausted the whole sphere of possibility and that he can as little
compass that sphere by the laws of experience and nature, as we can lay
a secure foundation for the operations of reason beyond the region of
experience. Such hypothetical defences against the pretensions of an
opponent must not be regarded as declarations of opinion. The
philosopher abandons them, so soon as the opposite party renounces its
dogmatical conceit. To maintain a simply negative position in relation
to propositions which rest on an insecure foundation, well befits the
moderation of a true philosopher; but to uphold the objections urged
against an opponent as proofs of the opposite statement is a proceeding
just as unwarrantable and arrogant as it is to attack the position of a
philosopher who advances affirmative propositions regarding such a
subject.

It is evident, therefore, that hypotheses, in the speculative sphere,
are valid, not as independent propositions, but only relatively to
opposite transcendent assumptions. For, to make the principles of
possible experience conditions of the possibility of things in general
is just as transcendent a procedure as to maintain the objective
reality of ideas which can be applied to no objects except such as lie
without the limits of possible experience. The judgements enounced by
pure reason must be necessary, or they must not be enounced at all.
Reason cannot trouble herself with opinions. But the hypotheses we have
been discussing are merely problematical judgements, which can neither
be confuted nor proved; while, therefore, they are not personal
opinions, they are indispensable as answers to objections which are
liable to be raised. But we must take care to confine them to this
function, and guard against any assumption on their part of absolute
validity, a proceeding which would involve reason in inextricable
difficulties and contradictions.

Section IV. The Discipline of Pure Reason in Relation to Proofs

It is a peculiarity, which distinguishes the proofs of transcendental
synthetical propositions from those of all other à priori synthetical
cognitions, that reason, in the case of the former, does not apply its
conceptions directly to an object, but is first obliged to prove, à
priori, the objective validity of these conceptions and the possibility
of their syntheses. This is not merely a prudential rule, it is
essential to the very possibility of the proof of a transcendental
proposition. If I am required to pass, à priori, beyond the conception
of an object, I find that it is utterly impossible without the guidance
of something which is not contained in the conception. In mathematics,
it is à priori intuition that guides my synthesis; and, in this case,
all our conclusions may be drawn immediately from pure intuition. In
transcendental cognition, so long as we are dealing only with
conceptions of the understanding, we are guided by possible experience.
That is to say, a proof in the sphere of transcendental cognition does
not show that the given conception (that of an event, for example)
leads directly to another conception (that of a cause)—for this would
be a saltus which nothing can justify; but it shows that experience
itself, and consequently the object of experience, is impossible
without the connection indicated by these conceptions. It follows that
such a proof must demonstrate the possibility of arriving,
synthetically and à priori, at a certain knowledge of things, which was
not contained in our conceptions of these things. Unless we pay
particular attention to this requirement, our proofs, instead of
pursuing the straight path indicated by reason, follow the tortuous
road of mere subjective association. The illusory conviction, which
rests upon subjective causes of association, and which is considered as
resulting from the perception of a real and objective natural affinity,
is always open to doubt and suspicion. For this reason, all the
attempts which have been made to prove the principle of sufficient
reason, have, according to the universal admission of philosophers,
been quite unsuccessful; and, before the appearance of transcendental
criticism, it was considered better, as this principle could not be
abandoned, to appeal boldly to the common sense of mankind (a
proceeding which always proves that the problem, which reason ought to
solve, is one in which philosophers find great difficulties), rather
than attempt to discover new dogmatical proofs.

But, if the proposition to be proved is a proposition of pure reason,
and if I aim at passing beyond my empirical conceptions by the aid of
mere ideas, it is necessary that the proof should first show that such
a step in synthesis is possible (which it is not), before it proceeds
to prove the truth of the proposition itself. The so-called proof of
the simple nature of the soul from the unity of apperception, is a very
plausible one. But it contains no answer to the objection, that, as the
notion of absolute simplicity is not a conception which is directly
applicable to a perception, but is an idea which must be inferred—if at
all—from observation, it is by no means evident how the mere fact of
consciousness, which is contained in all thought, although in so far a
simple representation, can conduct me to the consciousness and
cognition of a thing which is purely a thinking substance. When I
represent to my mind the power of my body as in motion, my body in this
thought is so far absolute unity, and my representation of it is a
simple one; and hence I can indicate this representation by the motion
of a point, because I have made abstraction of the size or volume of
the body. But I cannot hence infer that, given merely the moving power
of a body, the body may be cogitated as simple substance, merely
because the representation in my mind takes no account of its content
in space, and is consequently simple. The simple, in abstraction, is
very different from the objectively simple; and hence the Ego, which is
simple in the first sense, may, in the second sense, as indicating the
soul itself, be a very complex conception, with a very various content.
Thus it is evident that in all such arguments there lurks a paralogism.
We guess (for without some such surmise our suspicion would not be
excited in reference to a proof of this character) at the presence of
the paralogism, by keeping ever before us a criterion of the
possibility of those synthetical propositions which aim at proving more
than experience can teach us. This criterion is obtained from the
observation that such proofs do not lead us directly from the subject
of the proposition to be proved to the required predicate, but find it
necessary to presuppose the possibility of extending our cognition à
priori by means of ideas. We must, accordingly, always use the greatest
caution; we require, before attempting any proof, to consider how it is
possible to extend the sphere of cognition by the operations of pure
reason, and from what source we are to derive knowledge, which is not
obtained from the analysis of conceptions, nor relates, by
anticipation, to possible experience. We shall thus spare ourselves
much severe and fruitless labour, by not expecting from reason what is
beyond its power, or rather by subjecting it to discipline, and
teaching it to moderate its vehement desires for the extension of the
sphere of cognition.

The first rule for our guidance is, therefore, not to attempt a
transcendental proof, before we have considered from what source we are
to derive the principles upon which the proof is to be based, and what
right we have to expect that our conclusions from these principles will
be veracious. If they are principles of the understanding, it is vain
to expect that we should attain by their means to ideas of pure reason;
for these principles are valid only in regard to objects of possible
experience. If they are principles of pure reason, our labour is alike
in vain. For the principles of reason, if employed as objective, are
without exception dialectical and possess no validity or truth, except
as regulative principles of the systematic employment of reason in
experience. But when such delusive proof are presented to us, it is our
duty to meet them with the non liquet of a matured judgement; and,
although we are unable to expose the particular sophism upon which the
proof is based, we have a right to demand a deduction of the principles
employed in it; and, if these principles have their origin in pure
reason alone, such a deduction is absolutely impossible. And thus it is
unnecessary that we should trouble ourselves with the exposure and
confutation of every sophistical illusion; we may, at once, bring all
dialectic, which is inexhaustible in the production of fallacies,
before the bar of critical reason, which tests the principles upon
which all dialectical procedure is based. The second peculiarity of
transcendental proof is that a transcendental proposition cannot rest
upon more than a single proof. If I am drawing conclusions, not from
conceptions, but from intuition corresponding to a conception, be it
pure intuition, as in mathematics, or empirical, as in natural science,
the intuition which forms the basis of my inferences presents me with
materials for many synthetical propositions, which I can connect in
various modes, while, as it is allowable to proceed from different
points in the intention, I can arrive by different paths at the same
proposition.

But every transcendental proposition sets out from a conception, and
posits the synthetical condition of the possibility of an object
according to this conception. There must, therefore, be but one ground
of proof, because it is the conception alone which determines the
object; and thus the proof cannot contain anything more than the
determination of the object according to the conception. In our
Transcendental Analytic, for example, we inferred the principle: Every
event has a cause, from the only condition of the objective possibility
of our conception of an event. This is that an event cannot be
determined in time, and consequently cannot form a part of experience,
unless it stands under this dynamical law. This is the only possible
ground of proof; for our conception of an event possesses objective
validity, that is, is a true conception, only because the law of
causality determines an object to which it can refer. Other arguments
in support of this principle have been attempted—such as that from the
contingent nature of a phenomenon; but when this argument is
considered, we can discover no criterion of contingency, except the
fact of an event—of something happening, that is to say, the existence
which is preceded by the non-existence of an object, and thus we fall
back on the very thing to be proved. If the proposition: “Every
thinking being is simple,” is to be proved, we keep to the conception
of the ego, which is simple, and to which all thought has a relation.
The same is the case with the transcendental proof of the existence of
a Deity, which is based solely upon the harmony and reciprocal fitness
of the conceptions of an ens realissimum and a necessary being, and
cannot be attempted in any other manner.

This caution serves to simplify very much the criticism of all
propositions of reason. When reason employs conceptions alone, only one
proof of its thesis is possible, if any. When, therefore, the dogmatist
advances with ten arguments in favour of a proposition, we may be sure
that not one of them is conclusive. For if he possessed one which
proved the proposition he brings forward to demonstration—as must
always be the case with the propositions of pure reason—what need is
there for any more? His intention can only be similar to that of the
advocate who had different arguments for different judges; this
availing himself of the weakness of those who examine his arguments,
who, without going into any profound investigation, adopt the view of
the case which seems most probable at first sight and decide according
to it.

The third rule for the guidance of pure reason in the conduct of a
proof is that all transcendental proofs must never be apagogic or
indirect, but always ostensive or direct. The direct or ostensive proof
not only establishes the truth of the proposition to be proved, but
exposes the grounds of its truth; the apagogic, on the other hand, may
assure us of the truth of the proposition, but it cannot enable us to
comprehend the grounds of its possibility. The latter is, accordingly,
rather an auxiliary to an argument, than a strictly philosophical and
rational mode of procedure. In one respect, however, they have an
advantage over direct proofs, from the fact that the mode of arguing by
contradiction, which they employ, renders our understanding of the
question more clear, and approximates the proof to the certainty of an
intuitional demonstration.

The true reason why indirect proofs are employed in different sciences
is this. When the grounds upon which we seek to base a cognition are
too various or too profound, we try whether or not we may not discover
the truth of our cognition from its consequences. The modus ponens of
reasoning from the truth of its inferences to the truth of a
proposition would be admissible if all the inferences that can be drawn
from it are known to be true; for in this case there can be only one
possible ground for these inferences, and that is the true one. But
this is a quite impracticable procedure, as it surpasses all our powers
to discover all the possible inferences that can be drawn from a
proposition. But this mode of reasoning is employed, under favour, when
we wish to prove the truth of an hypothesis; in which case we admit the
truth of the conclusion—which is supported by analogy—that, if all the
inferences we have drawn and examined agree with the proposition
assumed, all other possible inferences will also agree with it. But, in
this way, an hypothesis can never be established as a demonstrated
truth. The modus tollens of reasoning from known inferences to the
unknown proposition, is not only a rigorous, but a very easy mode of
proof. For, if it can be shown that but one inference from a
proposition is false, then the proposition must itself be false.
Instead, then, of examining, in an ostensive argument, the whole series
of the grounds on which the truth of a proposition rests, we need only
take the opposite of this proposition, and if one inference from it be
false, then must the opposite be itself false; and, consequently, the
proposition which we wished to prove must be true.

The apagogic method of proof is admissible only in those sciences where
it is impossible to mistake a subjective representation for an
objective cognition. Where this is possible, it is plain that the
opposite of a given proposition may contradict merely the subjective
conditions of thought, and not the objective cognition; or it may
happen that both propositions contradict each other only under a
subjective condition, which is incorrectly considered to be objective,
and, as the condition is itself false, both propositions may be false,
and it will, consequently, be impossible to conclude the truth of the
one from the falseness of the other.

In mathematics such subreptions are impossible; and it is in this
science, accordingly, that the indirect mode of proof has its true
place. In the science of nature, where all assertion is based upon
empirical intuition, such subreptions may be guarded against by the
repeated comparison of observations; but this mode of proof is of
little value in this sphere of knowledge. But the transcendental
efforts of pure reason are all made in the sphere of the subjective,
which is the real medium of all dialectical illusion; and thus reason
endeavours, in its premisses, to impose upon us subjective
representations for objective cognitions. In the transcendental sphere
of pure reason, then, and in the case of synthetical propositions, it
is inadmissible to support a statement by disproving the
counter-statement. For only two cases are possible; either, the
counter-statement is nothing but the enouncement of the inconsistency
of the opposite opinion with the subjective conditions of reason, which
does not affect the real case (for example, we cannot comprehend the
unconditioned necessity of the existence of a being, and hence every
speculative proof of the existence of such a being must be opposed on
subjective grounds, while the possibility of this being in itself
cannot with justice be denied); or, both propositions, being
dialectical in their nature, are based upon an impossible conception.
In this latter case the rule applies: non entis nulla sunt predicata;
that is to say, what we affirm and what we deny, respecting such an
object, are equally untrue, and the apagogic mode of arriving at the
truth is in this case impossible. If, for example, we presuppose that
the world of sense is given in itself in its totality, it is false,
either that it is infinite, or that it is finite and limited in space.
Both are false, because the hypothesis is false. For the notion of
phenomena (as mere representations) which are given in themselves (as
objects) is self-contradictory; and the infinitude of this imaginary
whole would, indeed, be unconditioned, but would be inconsistent (as
everything in the phenomenal world is conditioned) with the
unconditioned determination and finitude of quantities which is
presupposed in our conception.

The apagogic mode of proof is the true source of those illusions which
have always had so strong an attraction for the admirers of dogmatical
philosophy. It may be compared to a champion who maintains the honour
and claims of the party he has adopted by offering battle to all who
doubt the validity of these claims and the purity of that honour; while
nothing can be proved in this way, except the respective strength of
the combatants, and the advantage, in this respect, is always on the
side of the attacking party. Spectators, observing that each party is
alternately conqueror and conquered, are led to regard the subject of
dispute as beyond the power of man to decide upon. But such an opinion
cannot be justified; and it is sufficient to apply to these reasoners
the remark:

_Non defensoribus istis
Tempus eget._

Each must try to establish his assertions by a transcendental deduction
of the grounds of proof employed in his argument, and thus enable us to
see in what way the claims of reason may be supported. If an opponent
bases his assertions upon subjective grounds, he may be refuted with
ease; not, however to the advantage of the dogmatist, who likewise
depends upon subjective sources of cognition and is in like manner
driven into a corner by his opponent. But, if parties employ the direct
method of procedure, they will soon discover the difficulty, nay, the
impossibility of proving their assertions, and will be forced to appeal
to prescription and precedence; or they will, by the help of criticism,
discover with ease the dogmatical illusions by which they had been
mocked, and compel reason to renounce its exaggerated pretensions to
speculative insight and to confine itself within the limits of its
proper sphere—that of practical principles.

Chapter II. The Canon of Pure Reason

It is a humiliating consideration for human reason that it is
incompetent to discover truth by means of pure speculation, but, on the
contrary, stands in need of discipline to check its deviations from the
straight path and to expose the illusions which it originates. But, on
the other hand, this consideration ought to elevate and to give it
confidence, for this discipline is exercised by itself alone, and it is
subject to the censure of no other power. The bounds, moreover, which
it is forced to set to its speculative exercise, form likewise a check
upon the fallacious pretensions of opponents; and thus what remains of
its possessions, after these exaggerated claims have been disallowed,
is secure from attack or usurpation. The greatest, and perhaps the
only, use of all philosophy of pure reason is, accordingly, of a purely
negative character. It is not an organon for the extension, but a
discipline for the determination, of the limits of its exercise; and
without laying claim to the discovery of new truth, it has the modest
merit of guarding against error.

At the same time, there must be some source of positive cognitions
which belong to the domain of pure reason and which become the causes
of error only from our mistaking their true character, while they form
the goal towards which reason continually strives. How else can we
account for the inextinguishable desire in the human mind to find a
firm footing in some region beyond the limits of the world of
experience? It hopes to attain to the possession of a knowledge in
which it has the deepest interest. It enters upon the path of pure
speculation; but in vain. We have some reason, however, to expect that,
in the only other way that lies open to it—the path of practical
reason—it may meet with better success.

I understand by a canon a list of the à priori principles of the proper
employment of certain faculties of cognition. Thus general logic, in
its analytical department, is a formal canon for the faculties of
understanding and reason. In the same way, Transcendental Analytic was
seen to be a canon of the pure understanding; for it alone is competent
to enounce true à priori synthetical cognitions. But, when no proper
employment of a faculty of cognition is possible, no canon can exist.
But the synthetical cognition of pure speculative reason is, as has
been shown, completely impossible. There cannot, therefore, exist any
canon for the speculative exercise of this faculty—for its speculative
exercise is entirely dialectical; and, consequently, transcendental
logic, in this respect, is merely a discipline, and not a canon. If,
then, there is any proper mode of employing the faculty of pure
reason—in which case there must be a canon for this faculty—this canon
will relate, not to the speculative, but to the practical use of
reason. This canon we now proceed to investigate.

Section I. Of the Ultimate End of the Pure Use of Reason

There exists in the faculty of reason a natural desire to venture
beyond the field of experience, to attempt to reach the utmost bounds
of all cognition by the help of ideas alone, and not to rest satisfied
until it has fulfilled its course and raised the sum of its cognitions
into a self-subsistent systematic whole. Is the motive for this
endeavour to be found in its speculative, or in its practical interests
alone?

Setting aside, at present, the results of the labours of pure reason in
its speculative exercise, I shall merely inquire regarding the problems
the solution of which forms its ultimate aim, whether reached or not,
and in relation to which all other aims are but partial and
intermediate. These highest aims must, from the nature of reason,
possess complete unity; otherwise the highest interest of humanity
could not be successfully promoted.

The transcendental speculation of reason relates to three things: the
freedom of the will, the immortality of the soul, and the existence of
God. The speculative interest which reason has in those questions is
very small; and, for its sake alone, we should not undertake the labour
of transcendental investigation—a labour full of toil and ceaseless
struggle. We should be loth to undertake this labour, because the
discoveries we might make would not be of the smallest use in the
sphere of concrete or physical investigation. We may find out that the
will is free, but this knowledge only relates to the intelligible cause
of our volition. As regards the phenomena or expressions of this will,
that is, our actions, we are bound, in obedience to an inviolable
maxim, without which reason cannot be employed in the sphere of
experience, to explain these in the same way as we explain all the
other phenomena of nature, that is to say, according to its
unchangeable laws. We may have discovered the spirituality and
immortality of the soul, but we cannot employ this knowledge to explain
the phenomena of this life, nor the peculiar nature of the future,
because our conception of an incorporeal nature is purely negative and
does not add anything to our knowledge, and the only inferences to be
drawn from it are purely fictitious. If, again, we prove the existence
of a supreme intelligence, we should be able from it to make the
conformity to aims existing in the arrangement of the world
comprehensible; but we should not be justified in deducing from it any
particular arrangement or disposition, or inferring any where it is not
perceived. For it is a necessary rule of the speculative use of reason
that we must not overlook natural causes, or refuse to listen to the
teaching of experience, for the sake of deducing what we know and
perceive from something that transcends all our knowledge. In one word,
these three propositions are, for the speculative reason, always
transcendent, and cannot be employed as immanent principles in relation
to the objects of experience; they are, consequently, of no use to us
in this sphere, being but the valueless results of the severe but
unprofitable efforts of reason.

If, then, the actual cognition of these three cardinal propositions is
perfectly useless, while Reason uses her utmost endeavours to induce us
to admit them, it is plain that their real value and importance relate
to our practical, and not to our speculative interest.

I term all that is possible through free will, practical. But if the
conditions of the exercise of free volition are empirical, reason can
have only a regulative, and not a constitutive, influence upon it, and
is serviceable merely for the introduction of unity into its empirical
laws. In the moral philosophy of prudence, for example, the sole
business of reason is to bring about a union of all the ends, which are
aimed at by our inclinations, into one ultimate end—that of
happiness—and to show the agreement which should exist among the means
of attaining that end. In this sphere, accordingly, reason cannot
present to us any other than pragmatical laws of free action, for our
guidance towards the aims set up by the senses, and is incompetent to
give us laws which are pure and determined completely à priori. On the
other hand, pure practical laws, the ends of which have been given by
reason entirely à priori, and which are not empirically conditioned,
but are, on the contrary, absolutely imperative in their nature, would
be products of pure reason. Such are the moral laws; and these alone
belong to the sphere of the practical exercise of reason, and admit of
a canon.

All the powers of reason, in the sphere of what may be termed pure
philosophy, are, in fact, directed to the three above-mentioned
problems alone. These again have a still higher end—the answer to the
question, what we ought to do, if the will is free, if there is a God
and a future world. Now, as this problem relates to our in reference to
the highest aim of humanity, it is evident that the ultimate intention
of nature, in the constitution of our reason, has been directed to the
moral alone.

We must take care, however, in turning our attention to an object which
is foreign[78] to the sphere of transcendental philosophy, not to
injure the unity of our system by digressions, nor, on the other hand,
to fail in clearness, by saying too little on the new subject of
discussion. I hope to avoid both extremes, by keeping as close as
possible to the transcendental, and excluding all psychological, that
is, empirical, elements.

 [78] All practical conceptions relate to objects of pleasure and pain,
 and consequently—in an indirect manner, at least—to objects of
 feeling. But as feeling is not a faculty of representation, but lies
 out of the sphere of our powers of cognition, the elements of our
 judgements, in so far as they relate to pleasure or pain, that is, the
 elements of our practical judgements, do not belong to transcendental
 philosophy, which has to do with pure à priori cognitions alone.

I have to remark, in the first place, that at present I treat of the
conception of freedom in the practical sense only, and set aside the
corresponding transcendental conception, which cannot be employed as a
ground of explanation in the phenomenal world, but is itself a problem
for pure reason. A will is purely animal (arbitrium brutum) when it is
determined by sensuous impulses or instincts only, that is, when it is
determined in a pathological manner. A will, which can be determined
independently of sensuous impulses, consequently by motives presented
by reason alone, is called a free will (arbitrium liberum); and
everything which is connected with this free will, either as principle
or consequence, is termed practical. The existence of practical freedom
can be proved from experience alone. For the human will is not
determined by that alone which immediately affects the senses; on the
contrary, we have the power, by calling up the notion of what is useful
or hurtful in a more distant relation, of overcoming the immediate
impressions on our sensuous faculty of desire. But these considerations
of what is desirable in relation to our whole state, that is, is in the
end good and useful, are based entirely upon reason. This faculty,
accordingly, enounces laws, which are imperative or objective laws of
freedom and which tell us what ought to take place, thus distinguishing
themselves from the laws of nature, which relate to that which does
take place. The laws of freedom or of free will are hence termed
practical laws.

Whether reason is not itself, in the actual delivery of these laws,
determined in its turn by other influences, and whether the action
which, in relation to sensuous impulses, we call free, may not, in
relation to higher and more remote operative causes, really form a part
of nature—these are questions which do not here concern us. They are
purely speculative questions; and all we have to do, in the practical
sphere, is to inquire into the rule of conduct which reason has to
present. Experience demonstrates to us the existence of practical
freedom as one of the causes which exist in nature, that is, it shows
the causal power of reason in the determination of the will. The idea
of transcendental freedom, on the contrary, requires that reason—in
relation to its causal power of commencing a series of phenomena—should
be independent of all sensuous determining causes; and thus it seems to
be in opposition to the law of nature and to all possible experience.
It therefore remains a problem for the human mind. But this problem
does not concern reason in its practical use; and we have, therefore,
in a canon of pure reason, to do with only two questions, which relate
to the practical interest of pure reason: Is there a God? and, Is there
a future life? The question of transcendental freedom is purely
speculative, and we may therefore set it entirely aside when we come to
treat of practical reason. Besides, we have already discussed this
subject in the antinomy of pure reason.

Section II. Of the Ideal of the Summum Bonum as a Determining Ground of
the Ultimate End of Pure Reason

Reason conducted us, in its speculative use, through the field of
experience and, as it can never find complete satisfaction in that
sphere, from thence to speculative ideas—which, however, in the end
brought us back again to experience, and thus fulfilled the purpose of
reason, in a manner which, though useful, was not at all in accordance
with our expectations. It now remains for us to consider whether pure
reason can be employed in a practical sphere, and whether it will here
conduct us to those ideas which attain the highest ends of pure reason,
as we have just stated them. We shall thus ascertain whether, from the
point of view of its practical interest, reason may not be able to
supply us with that which, on the speculative side, it wholly denies
us.

The whole interest of reason, speculative as well as practical, is
centred in the three following questions:

1. WHAT CAN I KNOW?
2. WHAT OUGHT I TO DO?
3. WHAT MAY I HOPE?

The first question is purely speculative. We have, as I flatter myself,
exhausted all the replies of which it is susceptible, and have at last
found the reply with which reason must content itself, and with which
it ought to be content, so long as it pays no regard to the practical.
But from the two great ends to the attainment of which all these
efforts of pure reason were in fact directed, we remain just as far
removed as if we had consulted our ease and declined the task at the
outset. So far, then, as knowledge is concerned, thus much, at least,
is established, that, in regard to those two problems, it lies beyond
our reach.

The second question is purely practical. As such it may indeed fall
within the province of pure reason, but still it is not transcendental,
but moral, and consequently cannot in itself form the subject of our
criticism.

The third question: If I act as I ought to do, what may I then hope?—is
at once practical and theoretical. The practical forms a clue to the
answer of the theoretical, and—in its highest form—speculative
question. For all hoping has happiness for its object and stands in
precisely the same relation to the practical and the law of morality as
knowing to the theoretical cognition of things and the law of nature.
The former arrives finally at the conclusion that something is (which
determines the ultimate end), because something ought to take place;
the latter, that something is (which operates as the highest cause),
because something does take place.

Happiness is the satisfaction of all our desires; extensive, in regard
to their multiplicity; intensive, in regard to their degree; and
protensive, in regard to their duration. The practical law based on the
motive of happiness I term a pragmatical law (or prudential rule); but
that law, assuming such to exist, which has no other motive than the
worthiness of being happy, I term a moral or ethical law. The first
tells us what we have to do, if we wish to become possessed of
happiness; the second dictates how we ought to act, in order to deserve
happiness. The first is based upon empirical principles; for it is only
by experience that I can learn either what inclinations exist which
desire satisfaction, or what are the natural means of satisfying them.
The second takes no account of our desires or the means of satisfying
them, and regards only the freedom of a rational being, and the
necessary conditions under which alone this freedom can harmonize with
the distribution of happiness according to principles. This second law
may therefore rest upon mere ideas of pure reason, and may be cognized
à priori.

I assume that there are pure moral laws which determine, entirely à
priori (without regard to empirical motives, that is, to happiness),
the conduct of a rational being, or in other words, to use which it
makes of its freedom, and that these laws are absolutely imperative
(not merely hypothetically, on the supposition of other empirical
ends), and therefore in all respects necessary. I am warranted in
assuming this, not only by the arguments of the most enlightened
moralists, but by the moral judgement of every man who will make the
attempt to form a distinct conception of such a law.

Pure reason, then, contains, not indeed in its speculative, but in its
practical, or, more strictly, its moral use, principles of the
possibility of experience, of such actions, namely, as, in accordance
with ethical precepts, might be met with in the history of man. For
since reason commands that such actions should take place, it must be
possible for them to take place; and hence a particular kind of
systematic unity—the moral—must be possible. We have found, it is true,
that the systematic unity of nature could not be established according
to speculative principles of reason, because, while reason possesses a
causal power in relation to freedom, it has none in relation to the
whole sphere of nature; and, while moral principles of reason can
produce free actions, they cannot produce natural laws. It is, then, in
its practical, but especially in its moral use, that the principles of
pure reason possess objective reality.

I call the world a moral world, in so far as it may be in accordance
with all the ethical laws—which, by virtue of the freedom of reasonable
beings, it can be, and according to the necessary laws of morality it
ought to be. But this world must be conceived only as an intelligible
world, inasmuch as abstraction is therein made of all conditions
(ends), and even of all impediments to morality (the weakness or
pravity of human nature). So far, then, it is a mere idea—though still
a practical idea—which may have, and ought to have, an influence on the
world of sense, so as to bring it as far as possible into conformity
with itself. The idea of a moral world has, therefore, objective
reality, not as referring to an object of intelligible intuition—for of
such an object we can form no conception whatever—but to the world of
sense—conceived, however, as an object of pure reason in its practical
use—and to a corpus mysticum of rational beings in it, in so far as the
liberum arbitrium of the individual is placed, under and by virtue of
moral laws, in complete systematic unity both with itself and with the
freedom of all others.

That is the answer to the first of the two questions of pure reason
which relate to its practical interest: Do that which will render thee
worthy of happiness. The second question is this: If I conduct myself
so as not to be unworthy of happiness, may I hope thereby to obtain
happiness? In order to arrive at the solution of this question, we must
inquire whether the principles of pure reason, which prescribe à priori
the law, necessarily also connect this hope with it.

I say, then, that just as the moral principles are necessary according
to reason in its practical use, so it is equally necessary according to
reason in its theoretical use to assume that every one has ground to
hope for happiness in the measure in which he has made himself worthy
of it in his conduct, and that therefore the system of morality is
inseparably (though only in the idea of pure reason) connected with
that of happiness.

Now in an intelligible, that is, in the moral world, in the conception
of which we make abstraction of all the impediments to morality
(sensuous desires), such a system of happiness, connected with and
proportioned to morality, may be conceived as necessary, because
freedom of volition—partly incited, and partly restrained by moral
laws—would be itself the cause of general happiness; and thus rational
beings, under the guidance of such principles, would be themselves the
authors both of their own enduring welfare and that of others. But such
a system of self-rewarding morality is only an idea, the carrying out
of which depends upon the condition that every one acts as he ought; in
other words, that all actions of reasonable beings be such as they
would be if they sprung from a Supreme Will, comprehending in, or
under, itself all particular wills. But since the moral law is binding
on each individual in the use of his freedom of volition, even if
others should not act in conformity with this law, neither the nature
of things, nor the causality of actions and their relation to morality,
determine how the consequences of these actions will be related to
happiness; and the necessary connection of the hope of happiness with
the unceasing endeavour to become worthy of happiness, cannot be
cognized by reason, if we take nature alone for our guide. This
connection can be hoped for only on the assumption that the cause of
nature is a supreme reason, which governs according to moral laws.

I term the idea of an intelligence in which the morally most perfect
will, united with supreme blessedness, is the cause of all happiness in
the world, so far as happiness stands in strict relation to morality
(as the worthiness of being happy), the ideal of the supreme Good. It
is only, then, in the ideal of the supreme original good, that pure
reason can find the ground of the practically necessary connection of
both elements of the highest derivative good, and accordingly of an
intelligible, that is, moral world. Now since we are necessitated by
reason to conceive ourselves as belonging to such a world, while the
senses present to us nothing but a world of phenomena, we must assume
the former as a consequence of our conduct in the world of sense (since
the world of sense gives us no hint of it), and therefore as future in
relation to us. Thus God and a future life are two hypotheses which,
according to the principles of pure reason, are inseparable from the
obligation which this reason imposes upon us.

Morality per se constitutes a system. But we can form no system of
happiness, except in so far as it is dispensed in strict proportion to
morality. But this is only possible in the intelligible world, under a
wise author and ruler. Such a ruler, together with life in such a
world, which we must look upon as future, reason finds itself compelled
to assume; or it must regard the moral laws as idle dreams, since the
necessary consequence which this same reason connects with them must,
without this hypothesis, fall to the ground. Hence also the moral laws
are universally regarded as commands, which they could not be did they
not connect à priori adequate consequences with their dictates, and
thus carry with them promises and threats. But this, again, they could
not do, did they not reside in a necessary being, as the Supreme Good,
which alone can render such a teleological unity possible.

Leibnitz termed the world, when viewed in relation to the rational
beings which it contains, and the moral relations in which they stand
to each other, under the government of the Supreme Good, the kingdom of
Grace, and distinguished it from the kingdom of Nature, in which these
rational beings live, under moral laws, indeed, but expect no other
consequences from their actions than such as follow according to the
course of nature in the world of sense. To view ourselves, therefore,
as in the kingdom of grace, in which all happiness awaits us, except in
so far as we ourselves limit our participation in it by actions which
render us unworthy of happiness, is a practically necessary idea of
reason.

Practical laws, in so far as they are subjective grounds of actions,
that is, subjective principles, are termed maxims. The judgements of
moral according to in its purity and ultimate results are framed
according ideas; the observance of its laws, according to maxims.

The whole course of our life must be subject to moral maxims; but this
is impossible, unless with the moral law, which is a mere idea, reason
connects an efficient cause which ordains to all conduct which is in
conformity with the moral law an issue either in this or in another
life, which is in exact conformity with our highest aims. Thus, without
a God and without a world, invisible to us now, but hoped for, the
glorious ideas of morality are, indeed, objects of approbation and of
admiration, but cannot be the springs of purpose and action. For they
do not satisfy all the aims which are natural to every rational being,
and which are determined à priori by pure reason itself, and necessary.

Happiness alone is, in the view of reason, far from being the complete
good. Reason does not approve of it (however much inclination may
desire it), except as united with desert. On the other hand, morality
alone, and with it, mere desert, is likewise far from being the
complete good. To make it complete, he who conducts himself in a manner
not unworthy of happiness, must be able to hope for the possession of
happiness. Even reason, unbiased by private ends, or interested
considerations, cannot judge otherwise, if it puts itself in the place
of a being whose business it is to dispense all happiness to others.
For in the practical idea both points are essentially combined, though
in such a way that participation in happiness is rendered possible by
the moral disposition, as its condition, and not conversely, the moral
disposition by the prospect of happiness. For a disposition which
should require the prospect of happiness as its necessary condition
would not be moral, and hence also would not be worthy of complete
happiness—a happiness which, in the view of reason, recognizes no
limitation but such as arises from our own immoral conduct.

Happiness, therefore, in exact proportion with the morality of rational
beings (whereby they are made worthy of happiness), constitutes alone
the supreme good of a world into which we absolutely must transport
ourselves according to the commands of pure but practical reason. This
world is, it is true, only an intelligible world; for of such a
systematic unity of ends as it requires, the world of sense gives us no
hint. Its reality can be based on nothing else but the hypothesis of a
supreme original good. In it independent reason, equipped with all the
sufficiency of a supreme cause, founds, maintains, and fulfils the
universal order of things, with the most perfect teleological harmony,
however much this order may be hidden from us in the world of sense.

This moral theology has the peculiar advantage, in contrast with
speculative theology, of leading inevitably to the conception of a
sole, perfect, and rational First Cause, whereof speculative theology
does not give us any indication on objective grounds, far less any
convincing evidence. For we find neither in transcendental nor in
natural theology, however far reason may lead us in these, any ground
to warrant us in assuming the existence of one only Being, which stands
at the head of all natural causes, and on which these are entirely
dependent. On the other hand, if we take our stand on moral unity as a
necessary law of the universe, and from this point of view consider
what is necessary to give this law adequate efficiency and, for us,
obligatory force, we must come to the conclusion that there is one only
supreme will, which comprehends all these laws in itself. For how,
under different wills, should we find complete unity of ends? This will
must be omnipotent, that all nature and its relation to morality in the
world may be subject to it; omniscient, that it may have knowledge of
the most secret feelings and their moral worth; omnipresent, that it
may be at hand to supply every necessity to which the highest weal of
the world may give rise; eternal, that this harmony of nature and
liberty may never fail; and so on.

But this systematic unity of ends in this world of intelligences—which,
as mere nature, is only a world of sense, but, as a system of freedom
of volition, may be termed an intelligible, that is, moral world
(regnum gratiae)—leads inevitably also to the teleological unity of all
things which constitute this great whole, according to universal
natural laws—just as the unity of the former is according to universal
and necessary moral laws—and unites the practical with the speculative
reason. The world must be represented as having originated from an
idea, if it is to harmonize with that use of reason without which we
cannot even consider ourselves as worthy of reason—namely, the moral
use, which rests entirely on the idea of the supreme good. Hence the
investigation of nature receives a teleological direction, and becomes,
in its widest extension, physico-theology. But this, taking its rise in
moral order as a unity founded on the essence of freedom, and not
accidentally instituted by external commands, establishes the
teleological view of nature on grounds which must be inseparably
connected with the internal possibility of things. This gives rise to a
transcendental theology, which takes the ideal of the highest
ontological perfection as a principle of systematic unity; and this
principle connects all things according to universal and necessary
natural laws, because all things have their origin in the absolute
necessity of the one only Primal Being.

What use can we make of our understanding, even in respect of
experience, if we do not propose ends to ourselves? But the highest
ends are those of morality, and it is only pure reason that can give us
the knowledge of these. Though supplied with these, and putting
ourselves under their guidance, we can make no teleological use of the
knowledge of nature, as regards cognition, unless nature itself has
established teleological unity. For without this unity we should not
even possess reason, because we should have no school for reason, and
no cultivation through objects which afford the materials for its
conceptions. But teleological unity is a necessary unity, and founded
on the essence of the individual will itself. Hence this will, which is
the condition of the application of this unity in concreto, must be so
likewise. In this way the transcendental enlargement of our rational
cognition would be, not the cause, but merely the effect of the
practical teleology which pure reason imposes upon us.

Hence, also, we find in the history of human reason that, before the
moral conceptions were sufficiently purified and determined, and before
men had attained to a perception of the systematic unity of ends
according to these conceptions and from necessary principles, the
knowledge of nature, and even a considerable amount of intellectual
culture in many other sciences, could produce only rude and vague
conceptions of the Deity, sometimes even admitting of an astonishing
indifference with regard to this question altogether. But the more
enlarged treatment of moral ideas, which was rendered necessary by the
extreme pure moral law of our religion, awakened the interest, and
thereby quickened the perceptions of reason in relation to this object.
In this way, and without the help either of an extended acquaintance
with nature, or of a reliable transcendental insight (for these have
been wanting in all ages), a conception of the Divine Being was arrived
at, which we now hold to be the correct one, not because speculative
reason convinces us of its correctness, but because it accords with the
moral principles of reason. Thus it is to pure reason, but only in its
practical use, that we must ascribe the merit of having connected with
our highest interest a cognition, of which mere speculation was able
only to form a conjecture, but the validity of which it was unable to
establish—and of having thereby rendered it, not indeed a demonstrated
dogma, but a hypothesis absolutely necessary to the essential ends of
reason.

But if practical reason has reached this elevation, and has attained to
the conception of a sole Primal Being as the supreme good, it must not,
therefore, imagine that it has transcended the empirical conditions of
its application, and risen to the immediate cognition of new objects;
it must not presume to start from the conception which it has gained,
and to deduce from it the moral laws themselves. For it was these very
laws, the internal practical necessity of which led us to the
hypothesis of an independent cause, or of a wise ruler of the universe,
who should give them effect. Hence we are not entitled to regard them
as accidental and derived from the mere will of the ruler, especially
as we have no conception of such a will, except as formed in accordance
with these laws. So far, then, as practical reason has the right to
conduct us, we shall not look upon actions as binding on us, because
they are the commands of God, but we shall regard them as divine
commands, because we are internally bound by them. We shall study
freedom under the teleological unity which accords with principles of
reason; we shall look upon ourselves as acting in conformity with the
divine will only in so far as we hold sacred the moral law which reason
teaches us from the nature of actions themselves, and we shall believe
that we can obey that will only by promoting the weal of the universe
in ourselves and in others. Moral theology is, therefore, only of
immanent use. It teaches us to fulfil our destiny here in the world, by
placing ourselves in harmony with the general system of ends, and warns
us against the fanaticism, nay, the crime of depriving reason of its
legislative authority in the moral conduct of life, for the purpose of
directly connecting this authority with the idea of the Supreme Being.
For this would be, not an immanent, but a transcendent use of moral
theology, and, like the transcendent use of mere speculation, would
inevitably pervert and frustrate the ultimate ends of reason.

Section III. Of Opinion, Knowledge, and Belief

The holding of a thing to be true is a phenomenon in our understanding
which may rest on objective grounds, but requires, also, subjective
causes in the mind of the person judging. If a judgement is valid for
every rational being, then its ground is objectively sufficient, and it
is termed a conviction. If, on the other hand, it has its ground in the
particular character of the subject, it is termed a persuasion.

Persuasion is a mere illusion, the ground of the judgement, which lies
solely in the subject, being regarded as objective. Hence a judgement
of this kind has only private validity—is only valid for the individual
who judges, and the holding of a thing to be true in this way cannot be
communicated. But truth depends upon agreement with the object, and
consequently the judgements of all understandings, if true, must be in
agreement with each other (consentientia uni tertio consentiunt inter
se). Conviction may, therefore, be distinguished, from an external
point of view, from persuasion, by the possibility of communicating it
and by showing its validity for the reason of every man; for in this
case the presumption, at least, arises that the agreement of all
judgements with each other, in spite of the different characters of
individuals, rests upon the common ground of the agreement of each with
the object, and thus the correctness of the judgement is established.

Persuasion, accordingly, cannot be subjectively distinguished from
conviction, that is, so long as the subject views its judgement simply
as a phenomenon of its own mind. But if we inquire whether the grounds
of our judgement, which are valid for us, produce the same effect on
the reason of others as on our own, we have then the means, though only
subjective means, not, indeed, of producing conviction, but of
detecting the merely private validity of the judgement; in other words,
of discovering that there is in it the element of mere persuasion.

If we can, in addition to this, develop the subjective causes of the
judgement, which we have taken for its objective grounds, and thus
explain the deceptive judgement as a phenomenon in our mind, apart
altogether from the objective character of the object, we can then
expose the illusion and need be no longer deceived by it, although, if
its subjective cause lies in our nature, we cannot hope altogether to
escape its influence.

I can only maintain, that is, affirm as necessarily valid for every
one, that which produces conviction. Persuasion I may keep for myself,
if it is agreeable to me; but I cannot, and ought not, to attempt to
impose it as binding upon others.

Holding for true, or the subjective validity of a judgement in relation
to conviction (which is, at the same time, objectively valid), has the
three following degrees: opinion, belief, and knowledge. Opinion is a
consciously insufficient judgement, subjectively as well as
objectively. Belief is subjectively sufficient, but is recognized as
being objectively insufficient. Knowledge is both subjectively and
objectively sufficient. Subjective sufficiency is termed conviction
(for myself); objective sufficiency is termed certainty (for all). I
need not dwell longer on the explanation of such simple conceptions.

I must never venture to be of opinion, without knowing something, at
least, by which my judgement, in itself merely problematical, is
brought into connection with the truth—which connection, although not
perfect, is still something more than an arbitrary fiction. Moreover,
the law of such a connection must be certain. For if, in relation to
this law, I have nothing more than opinion, my judgement is but a play
of the imagination, without the least relation to truth. In the
judgements of pure reason, opinion has no place. For, as they do not
rest on empirical grounds and as the sphere of pure reason is that of
necessary truth and à priori cognition, the principle of connection in
it requires universality and necessity, and consequently perfect
certainty—otherwise we should have no guide to the truth at all. Hence
it is absurd to have an opinion in pure mathematics; we must know, or
abstain from forming a judgement altogether. The case is the same with
the maxims of morality. For we must not hazard an action on the mere
opinion that it is allowed, but we must know it to be so. In the
transcendental sphere of reason, on the other hand, the term opinion is
too weak, while the word knowledge is too strong. From the merely
speculative point of view, therefore, we cannot form a judgement at
all. For the subjective grounds of a judgement, such as produce belief,
cannot be admitted in speculative inquiries, inasmuch as they cannot
stand without empirical support and are incapable of being communicated
to others in equal measure.

But it is only from the practical point of view that a theoretically
insufficient judgement can be termed belief. Now the practical
reference is either to skill or to morality; to the former, when the
end proposed is arbitrary and accidental, to the latter, when it is
absolutely necessary.

If we propose to ourselves any end whatever, the conditions of its
attainment are hypothetically necessary. The necessity is subjectively,
but still only comparatively, sufficient, if I am acquainted with no
other conditions under which the end can be attained. On the other
hand, it is sufficient, absolutely and for every one, if I know for
certain that no one can be acquainted with any other conditions under
which the attainment of the proposed end would be possible. In the
former case my supposition—my judgement with regard to certain
conditions—is a merely accidental belief; in the latter it is a
necessary belief. The physician must pursue some course in the case of
a patient who is in danger, but is ignorant of the nature of the
disease. He observes the symptoms, and concludes, according to the best
of his judgement, that it is a case of phthisis. His belief is, even in
his own judgement, only contingent: another man might, perhaps come
nearer the truth. Such a belief, contingent indeed, but still forming
the ground of the actual use of means for the attainment of certain
ends, I term Pragmatical belief.

The usual test, whether that which any one maintains is merely his
persuasion, or his subjective conviction at least, that is, his firm
belief, is a bet. It frequently happens that a man delivers his
opinions with so much boldness and assurance, that he appears to be
under no apprehension as to the possibility of his being in error. The
offer of a bet startles him, and makes him pause. Sometimes it turns
out that his persuasion may be valued at a ducat, but not at ten. For
he does not hesitate, perhaps, to venture a ducat, but if it is
proposed to stake ten, he immediately becomes aware of the possibility
of his being mistaken—a possibility which has hitherto escaped his
observation. If we imagine to ourselves that we have to stake the
happiness of our whole life on the truth of any proposition, our
judgement drops its air of triumph, we take the alarm, and discover the
actual strength of our belief. Thus pragmatical belief has degrees,
varying in proportion to the interests at stake.

Now, in cases where we cannot enter upon any course of action in
reference to some object, and where, accordingly, our judgement is
purely theoretical, we can still represent to ourselves, in thought,
the possibility of a course of action, for which we suppose that we
have sufficient grounds, if any means existed of ascertaining the truth
of the matter. Thus we find in purely theoretical judgements an
analogon of practical judgements, to which the word belief may properly
be applied, and which we may term doctrinal belief. I should not
hesitate to stake my all on the truth of the proposition—if there were
any possibility of bringing it to the test of experience—that, at
least, some one of the planets, which we see, is inhabited. Hence I say
that I have not merely the opinion, but the strong belief, on the
correctness of which I would stake even many of the advantages of life,
that there are inhabitants in other worlds.

Now we must admit that the doctrine of the existence of God belongs to
doctrinal belief. For, although in respect to the theoretical cognition
of the universe I do not require to form any theory which necessarily
involves this idea, as the condition of my explanation of the phenomena
which the universe presents, but, on the contrary, am rather bound so
to use my reason as if everything were mere nature, still teleological
unity is so important a condition of the application of my reason to
nature, that it is impossible for me to ignore it—especially since, in
addition to these considerations, abundant examples of it are supplied
by experience. But the sole condition, so far as my knowledge extends,
under which this unity can be my guide in the investigation of nature,
is the assumption that a supreme intelligence has ordered all things
according to the wisest ends. Consequently, the hypothesis of a wise
author of the universe is necessary for my guidance in the
investigation of nature—is the condition under which alone I can fulfil
an end which is contingent indeed, but by no means unimportant.
Moreover, since the result of my attempts so frequently confirms the
utility of this assumption, and since nothing decisive can be adduced
against it, it follows that it would be saying far too little to term
my judgement, in this case, a mere opinion, and that, even in this
theoretical connection, I may assert that I firmly believe in God.
Still, if we use words strictly, this must not be called a practical,
but a doctrinal belief, which the theology of nature (physico-theology)
must also produce in my mind. In the wisdom of a Supreme Being, and in
the shortness of life, so inadequate to the development of the glorious
powers of human nature, we may find equally sufficient grounds for a
doctrinal belief in the future life of the human soul.

The expression of belief is, in such cases, an expression of modesty
from the objective point of view, but, at the same time, of firm
confidence, from the subjective. If I should venture to term this
merely theoretical judgement even so much as a hypothesis which I am
entitled to assume; a more complete conception, with regard to another
world and to the cause of the world, might then be justly required of
me than I am, in reality, able to give. For, if I assume anything, even
as a mere hypothesis, I must, at least, know so much of the properties
of such a being as will enable me, not to form the conception, but to
imagine the existence of it. But the word belief refers only to the
guidance which an idea gives me, and to its subjective influence on the
conduct of my reason, which forces me to hold it fast, though I may not
be in a position to give a speculative account of it.

But mere doctrinal belief is, to some extent, wanting in stability. We
often quit our hold of it, in consequence of the difficulties which
occur in speculation, though in the end we inevitably return to it
again.

It is quite otherwise with moral belief. For in this sphere action is
absolutely necessary, that is, I must act in obedience to the moral law
in all points. The end is here incontrovertibly established, and there
is only one condition possible, according to the best of my perception,
under which this end can harmonize with all other ends, and so have
practical validity—namely, the existence of a God and of a future
world. I know also, to a certainty, that no one can be acquainted with
any other conditions which conduct to the same unity of ends under the
moral law. But since the moral precept is, at the same time, my maxim
(as reason requires that it should be), I am irresistibly constrained
to believe in the existence of God and in a future life; and I am sure
that nothing can make me waver in this belief, since I should thereby
overthrow my moral maxims, the renunciation of which would render me
hateful in my own eyes.

Thus, while all the ambitious attempts of reason to penetrate beyond
the limits of experience end in disappointment, there is still enough
left to satisfy us in a practical point of view. No one, it is true,
will be able to boast that he knows that there is a God and a future
life; for, if he knows this, he is just the man whom I have long wished
to find. All knowledge, regarding an object of mere reason, can be
communicated; and I should thus be enabled to hope that my own
knowledge would receive this wonderful extension, through the
instrumentality of his instruction. No, my conviction is not logical,
but moral certainty; and since it rests on subjective grounds (of the
moral sentiment), I must not even say: It is morally certain that there
is a God, etc., but: I am morally certain, that is, my belief in God
and in another world is so interwoven with my moral nature that I am
under as little apprehension of having the former torn from me as of
losing the latter.

The only point in this argument that may appear open to suspicion is
that this rational belief presupposes the existence of moral
sentiments. If we give up this assumption, and take a man who is
entirely indifferent with regard to moral laws, the question which
reason proposes, becomes then merely a problem for speculation and may,
indeed, be supported by strong grounds from analogy, but not by such as
will compel the most obstinate scepticism to give way.[79] But in these
questions no man is free from all interest. For though the want of good
sentiments may place him beyond the influence of moral interests, still
even in this case enough may be left to make him fear the existence of
God and a future life. For he cannot pretend to any certainty of the
non-existence of God and of a future life, unless—since it could only
be proved by mere reason, and therefore apodeictically—he is prepared
to establish the impossibility of both, which certainly no reasonable
man would undertake to do. This would be a negative belief, which could
not, indeed, produce morality and good sentiments, but still could
produce an analogon of these, by operating as a powerful restraint on
the outbreak of evil dispositions.

 [79] The human mind (as, I believe, every rational being must of
 necessity do) takes a natural interest in morality, although this
 interest is not undivided, and may not be practically in
 preponderance. If you strengthen and increase it, you will find the
 reason become docile, more enlightened, and more capable of uniting
 the speculative interest with the practical. But if you do not take
 care at the outset, or at least midway, to make men good, you will
 never force them into an honest belief.

But, it will be said, is this all that pure reason can effect, in
opening up prospects beyond the limits of experience? Nothing more than
two articles of belief? Common sense could have done as much as this,
without taking the philosophers to counsel in the matter!

I shall not here eulogize philosophy for the benefits which the
laborious efforts of its criticism have conferred on human reason—even
granting that its merit should turn out in the end to be only
negative—for on this point something more will be said in the next
section. But, I ask, do you require that that knowledge which concerns
all men, should transcend the common understanding, and should only be
revealed to you by philosophers? The very circumstance which has called
forth your censure, is the best confirmation of the correctness of our
previous assertions, since it discloses, what could not have been
foreseen, that Nature is not chargeable with any partial distribution
of her gifts in those matters which concern all men without distinction
and that, in respect to the essential ends of human nature, we cannot
advance further with the help of the highest philosophy, than under the
guidance which nature has vouchsafed to the meanest understanding.

Chapter III. The Architectonic of Pure Reason

By the term architectonic I mean the art of constructing a system.
Without systematic unity, our knowledge cannot become science; it will
be an aggregate, and not a system. Thus architectonic is the doctrine
of the scientific in cognition, and therefore necessarily forms part of
our methodology.

Reason cannot permit our knowledge to remain in an unconnected and
rhapsodistic state, but requires that the sum of our cognitions should
constitute a system. It is thus alone that they can advance the ends of
reason. By a system I mean the unity of various cognitions under one
idea. This idea is the conception—given by reason—of the form of a
whole, in so far as the conception determines à priori not only the
limits of its content, but the place which each of its parts is to
occupy. The scientific idea contains, therefore, the end and the form
of the whole which is in accordance with that end. The unity of the
end, to which all the parts of the system relate, and through which all
have a relation to each other, communicates unity to the whole system,
so that the absence of any part can be immediately detected from our
knowledge of the rest; and it determines à priori the limits of the
system, thus excluding all contingent or arbitrary additions. The whole
is thus an organism (articulatio), and not an aggregate (coacervatio);
it may grow from within (per intussusceptionem), but it cannot increase
by external additions (per appositionem). It is, thus, like an animal
body, the growth of which does not add any limb, but, without changing
their proportions, makes each in its sphere stronger and more active.

We require, for the execution of the idea of a system, a schema, that
is, a content and an arrangement of parts determined à priori by the
principle which the aim of the system prescribes. A schema which is not
projected in accordance with an idea, that is, from the standpoint of
the highest aim of reason, but merely empirically, in accordance with
accidental aims and purposes (the number of which cannot be
predetermined), can give us nothing more than technical unity. But the
schema which is originated from an idea (in which case reason presents
us with aims à priori, and does not look for them to experience), forms
the basis of architectonical unity. A science, in the proper
acceptation of that term, cannot be formed technically, that is, from
observation of the similarity existing between different objects, and
the purely contingent use we make of our knowledge in concreto with
reference to all kinds of arbitrary external aims; its constitution
must be framed on architectonical principles, that is, its parts must
be shown to possess an essential affinity, and be capable of being
deduced from one supreme and internal aim or end, which forms the
condition of the possibility of the scientific whole. The schema of a
science must give à priori the plan of it (monogramma), and the
division of the whole into parts, in conformity with the idea of the
science; and it must also distinguish this whole from all others,
according to certain understood principles.

No one will attempt to construct a science, unless he have some idea to
rest on as a proper basis. But, in the elaboration of the science, he
finds that the schema, nay, even the definition which he at first gave
of the science, rarely corresponds with his idea; for this idea lies,
like a germ, in our reason, its parts undeveloped and hid even from
microscopical observation. For this reason, we ought to explain and
define sciences, not according to the description which the originator
gives of them, but according to the idea which we find based in reason
itself, and which is suggested by the natural unity of the parts of
the science already accumulated. For it will often be found that the
originator of a science and even his latest successors remain attached
to an erroneous idea, which they cannot render clear to themselves, and
that they thus fail in determining the true content, the articulation
or systematic unity, and the limits of their science.

It is unfortunate that, only after having occupied ourselves for a long
time in the collection of materials, under the guidance of an idea
which lies undeveloped in the mind, but not according to any definite
plan of arrangement—nay, only after we have spent much time and labour
in the technical disposition of our materials, does it become possible
to view the idea of a science in a clear light, and to project,
according to architectonical principles, a plan of the whole, in
accordance with the aims of reason. Systems seem, like certain worms,
to be formed by a kind of generatio aequivoca—by the mere confluence of
conceptions, and to gain completeness only with the progress of time.
But the schema or germ of all lies in reason; and thus is not only
every system organized according to its own idea, but all are united
into one grand system of human knowledge, of which they form members.
For this reason, it is possible to frame an architectonic of all human
cognition, the formation of which, at the present time, considering the
immense materials collected or to be found in the ruins of old systems,
would not indeed be very difficult. Our purpose at present is merely to
sketch the plan of the architectonic of all cognition given by pure
reason; and we begin from the point where the main root of human
knowledge divides into two, one of which is reason. By reason I
understand here the whole higher faculty of cognition, the rational
being placed in contradistinction to the empirical.

If I make complete abstraction of the content of cognition, objectively
considered, all cognition is, from a subjective point of view, either
historical or rational. Historical cognition is cognitio ex datis,
rational, cognitio ex principiis. Whatever may be the original source
of a cognition, it is, in relation to the person who possesses it,
merely historical, if he knows only what has been given him from
another quarter, whether that knowledge was communicated by direct
experience or by instruction. Thus the person who has learned a system
of philosophy—say the Wolfian—although he has a perfect knowledge of
all the principles, definitions, and arguments in that philosophy, as
well as of the divisions that have been made of the system, possesses
really no more than an historical knowledge of the Wolfian system; he
knows only what has been told him, his judgements are only those which
he has received from his teachers. Dispute the validity of a
definition, and he is completely at a loss to find another. He has
formed his mind on another’s; but the imitative faculty is not the
productive. His knowledge has not been drawn from reason; and although,
objectively considered, it is rational knowledge, subjectively, it is
merely historical. He has learned this or that philosophy and is merely
a plaster cast of a living man. Rational cognitions which are
objective, that is, which have their source in reason, can be so termed
from a subjective point of view, only when they have been drawn by the
individual himself from the sources of reason, that is, from
principles; and it is in this way alone that criticism, or even the
rejection of what has been already learned, can spring up in the mind.

All rational cognition is, again, based either on conceptions, or on
the construction of conceptions. The former is termed philosophical,
the latter mathematical. I have already shown the essential difference
of these two methods of cognition in the first chapter. A cognition may
be objectively philosophical and subjectively historical—as is the case
with the majority of scholars and those who cannot look beyond the
limits of their system, and who remain in a state of pupilage all their
lives. But it is remarkable that mathematical knowledge, when committed
to memory, is valid, from the subjective point of view, as rational
knowledge also, and that the same distinction cannot be drawn here as
in the case of philosophical cognition. The reason is that the only way
of arriving at this knowledge is through the essential principles of
reason, and thus it is always certain and indisputable; because reason
is employed in concreto—but at the same time à priori—that is, in pure
and, therefore, infallible intuition; and thus all causes of illusion
and error are excluded. Of all the à priori sciences of reason,
therefore, mathematics alone can be learned. Philosophy—unless it be in
an historical manner—cannot be learned; we can at most learn to
philosophize.

Philosophy is the system of all philosophical cognition. We must use
this term in an objective sense, if we understand by it the archetype
of all attempts at philosophizing, and the standard by which all
subjective philosophies are to be judged. In this sense, philosophy is
merely the idea of a possible science, which does not exist in
concreto, but to which we endeavour in various ways to approximate,
until we have discovered the right path to pursue—a path overgrown by
the errors and illusions of sense—and the image we have hitherto tried
in vain to shape has become a perfect copy of the great prototype.
Until that time, we cannot learn philosophy—it does not exist; if it
does, where is it, who possesses it, and how shall we know it? We can
only learn to philosophize; in other words, we can only exercise our
powers of reasoning in accordance with general principles, retaining at
the same time, the right of investigating the sources of these
principles, of testing, and even of rejecting them.

Until then, our conception of philosophy is only a scholastic
conception—a conception, that is, of a system of cognition which we are
trying to elaborate into a science; all that we at present know being
the systematic unity of this cognition, and consequently the logical
completeness of the cognition for the desired end. But there is also a
cosmical conception (conceptus cosmicus) of philosophy, which has
always formed the true basis of this term, especially when philosophy
was personified and presented to us in the ideal of a philosopher. In
this view philosophy is the science of the relation of all cognition to
the ultimate and essential aims of human reason (teleologia rationis
humanae), and the philosopher is not merely an artist—who occupies
himself with conceptions—but a lawgiver, legislating for human reason.
In this sense of the word, it would be in the highest degree arrogant
to assume the title of philosopher, and to pretend that we had reached
the perfection of the prototype which lies in the idea alone.

The mathematician, the natural philosopher, and the logician—how far
soever the first may have advanced in rational, and the two latter in
philosophical knowledge—are merely artists, engaged in the arrangement
and formation of conceptions; they cannot be termed philosophers. Above
them all, there is the ideal teacher, who employs them as instruments
for the advancement of the essential aims of human reason. Him alone
can we call philosopher; but he nowhere exists. But the idea of his
legislative power resides in the mind of every man, and it alone
teaches us what kind of systematic unity philosophy demands in view of
the ultimate aims of reason. This idea is, therefore, a cosmical
conception.[80]

 [80] By a cosmical conception, I mean one in which all men necessarily
 take an interest; the aim of a science must accordingly be determined
 according to scholastic conceptions, if it is regarded merely as a
 means to certain arbitrarily proposed ends.

In view of the complete systematic unity of reason, there can only be
one ultimate end of all the operations of the mind. To this all other
aims are subordinate, and nothing more than means for its attainment.
This ultimate end is the destination of man, and the philosophy which
relates to it is termed moral philosophy. The superior position
occupied by moral philosophy, above all other spheres for the
operations of reason, sufficiently indicates the reason why the
ancients always included the idea—and in an especial manner—of moralist
in that of philosopher. Even at the present day, we call a man who
appears to have the power of self-government, even although his
knowledge may be very limited, by the name of philosopher.

The legislation of human reason, or philosophy, has two objects—nature
and freedom—and thus contains not only the laws of nature, but also
those of ethics, at first in two separate systems, which, finally,
merge into one grand philosophical system of cognition. The philosophy
of nature relates to that which is, that of ethics to that which ought
to be.

But all philosophy is either cognition on the basis of pure reason, or
the cognition of reason on the basis of empirical principles. The
former is termed pure, the latter empirical philosophy.

The philosophy of pure reason is either propædeutic, that is, an
inquiry into the powers of reason in regard to pure à priori cognition,
and is termed critical philosophy; or it is, secondly, the system of
pure reason—a science containing the systematic presentation of the
whole body of philosophical knowledge, true as well as illusory, given
by pure reason—and is called metaphysic. This name may, however, be
also given to the whole system of pure philosophy, critical philosophy
included, and may designate the investigation into the sources or
possibility of à priori cognition, as well as the presentation of the à
priori cognitions which form a system of pure philosophy—excluding, at
the same time, all empirical and mathematical elements.

Metaphysic is divided into that of the speculative and that of the
practical use of pure reason, and is, accordingly, either the
metaphysic of nature, or the metaphysic of ethics. The former contains
all the pure rational principles—based upon conceptions alone (and thus
excluding mathematics)—of all theoretical cognition; the latter, the
principles which determine and necessitate à priori all action. Now
moral philosophy alone contains a code of laws—for the regulation of
our actions—which are deduced from principles entirely à priori. Hence
the metaphysic of ethics is the only pure moral philosophy, as it is
not based upon anthropological or other empirical considerations. The
metaphysic of speculative reason is what is commonly called metaphysic
in the more limited sense. But as pure moral philosophy properly forms
a part of this system of cognition, we must allow it to retain the name
of metaphysic, although it is not requisite that we should insist on so
terming it in our present discussion.

It is of the highest importance to separate those cognitions which
differ from others both in kind and in origin, and to take great care
that they are not confounded with those with which they are generally
found connected. What the chemist does in the analysis of substances,
what the mathematician in pure mathematics, is, in a still higher
degree, the duty of the philosopher, that the value of each different
kind of cognition, and the part it takes in the operations of the mind,
may be clearly defined. Human reason has never wanted a metaphysic of
some kind, since it attained the power of thought, or rather of
reflection; but it has never been able to keep this sphere of thought
and cognition pure from all admixture of foreign elements. The idea of
a science of this kind is as old as speculation itself; and what mind
does not speculate—either in the scholastic or in the popular fashion?
At the same time, it must be admitted that even thinkers by profession
have been unable clearly to explain the distinction between the two
elements of our cognition—the one completely à priori, the other à
posteriori; and hence the proper definition of a peculiar kind of
cognition, and with it the just idea of a science which has so long and
so deeply engaged the attention of the human mind, has never been
established. When it was said: “Metaphysic is the science of the first
principles of human cognition,” this definition did not signalize a
peculiarity in kind, but only a difference in degree; these first
principles were thus declared to be more general than others, but no
criterion of distinction from empirical principles was given. Of these
some are more general, and therefore higher, than others; and—as we
cannot distinguish what is completely à priori from that which is known
to be à posteriori—where shall we draw the line which is to separate
the higher and so-called first principles, from the lower and
subordinate principles of cognition? What would be said if we were
asked to be satisfied with a division of the epochs of the world into
the earlier centuries and those following them? “Does the fifth, or the
tenth century belong to the earlier centuries?” it would be asked. In
the same way I ask: Does the conception of extension belong to
metaphysics? You answer, “Yes.” Well, that of body too? “Yes.” And that
of a fluid body? You stop, you are unprepared to admit this; for if you
do, everything will belong to metaphysics. From this it is evident that
the mere degree of subordination—of the particular to the
general—cannot determine the limits of a science; and that, in the
present case, we must expect to find a difference in the conceptions of
metaphysics both in kind and in origin. The fundamental idea of
metaphysics was obscured on another side by the fact that this kind of
à priori cognition showed a certain similarity in character with the
science of mathematics. Both have the property in common of possessing
an à priori origin; but, in the one, our knowledge is based upon
conceptions, in the other, on the construction of conceptions. Thus a
decided dissimilarity between philosophical and mathematical cognition
comes out—a dissimilarity which was always felt, but which could not be
made distinct for want of an insight into the criteria of the
difference. And thus it happened that, as philosophers themselves
failed in the proper development of the idea of their science, the
elaboration of the science could not proceed with a definite aim, or
under trustworthy guidance. Thus, too, philosophers, ignorant of the
path they ought to pursue and always disputing with each other
regarding the discoveries which each asserted he had made, brought
their science into disrepute with the rest of the world, and finally,
even among themselves.

All pure à priori cognition forms, therefore, in view of the peculiar
faculty which originates it, a peculiar and distinct unity; and
metaphysic is the term applied to the philosophy which attempts to
represent that cognition in this systematic unity. The speculative part
of metaphysic, which has especially appropriated this appellation—that
which we have called the metaphysic of nature—and which considers
everything, as it is (not as it ought to be), by means of à priori
conceptions, is divided in the following manner.

Metaphysic, in the more limited acceptation of the term, consists of
two parts—transcendental philosophy and the physiology of pure reason.
The former presents the system of all the conceptions and principles
belonging to the understanding and the reason, and which relate to
objects in general, but not to any particular given objects
(Ontologia); the latter has nature for its subject-matter, that is, the
sum of given objects—whether given to the senses, or, if we will, to
some other kind of intuition—and is accordingly physiology, although
only rationalis. But the use of the faculty of reason in this rational
mode of regarding nature is either physical or hyperphysical, or, more
properly speaking, immanent or transcendent. The former relates to
nature, in so far as our knowledge regarding it may be applied in
experience (in concreto); the latter to that connection of the objects
of experience, which transcends all experience. Transcendent physiology
has, again, an internal and an external connection with its object,
both, however, transcending possible experience; the former is the
physiology of nature as a whole, or transcendental cognition of the
world, the latter of the connection of the whole of nature with a being
above nature, or transcendental cognition of God.

Immanent physiology, on the contrary, considers nature as the sum of
all sensuous objects, consequently, as it is presented to us—but still
according to à priori conditions, for it is under these alone that
nature can be presented to our minds at all. The objects of immanent
physiology are of two kinds: 1. Those of the external senses, or
corporeal nature; 2. The object of the internal sense, the soul, or, in
accordance with our fundamental conceptions of it, thinking nature. The
metaphysics of corporeal nature is called physics; but, as it must
contain only the principles of an à priori cognition of nature, we must
term it rational physics. The metaphysics of thinking nature is called
psychology, and for the same reason is to be regarded as merely the
rational cognition of the soul.

Thus the whole system of metaphysics consists of four principal parts:
1. Ontology; 2. Rational Physiology; 3. Rational cosmology; and 4.
Rational theology. The second part—that of the rational doctrine of
nature—may be subdivided into two, physica rationalis[81] and
psychologia rationalis.

 [81] It must not be supposed that I mean by this appellation what is
 generally called physica general is, and which is rather mathematics
 than a philosophy of nature. For the metaphysic of nature is
 completely different from mathematics, nor is it so rich in results,
 although it is of great importance as a critical test of the
 application of pure understanding—cognition to nature. For want of its
 guidance, even mathematicians, adopting certain common notions—which
 are, in fact, metaphysical—have unconsciously crowded their theories
 of nature with hypotheses, the fallacy of which becomes evident upon
 the application of the principles of this metaphysic, without
 detriment, however, to the employment of mathematics in this sphere of
 cognition.

The fundamental idea of a philosophy of pure reason of necessity
dictates this division; it is, therefore, architectonical—in accordance
with the highest aims of reason, and not merely technical, or according
to certain accidentally-observed similarities existing between the
different parts of the whole science. For this reason, also, is the
division immutable and of legislative authority. But the reader may
observe in it a few points to which he ought to demur, and which may
weaken his conviction of its truth and legitimacy.

In the first place, how can I desire an à priori cognition or
metaphysic of objects, in so far as they are given à posteriori? and
how is it possible to cognize the nature of things according to à
priori principles, and to attain to a rational physiology? The answer
is this. We take from experience nothing more than is requisite to
present us with an object (in general) of the external or of the
internal sense; in the former case, by the mere conception of matter
(impenetrable and inanimate extension), in the latter, by the
conception of a thinking being—given in the internal empirical
representation, I think. As to the rest, we must not employ in our
metaphysic of these objects any empirical principles (which add to the
content of our conceptions by means of experience), for the purpose of
forming by their help any judgements respecting these objects.

Secondly, what place shall we assign to empirical psychology, which has
always been considered a part of metaphysics, and from which in our
time such important philosophical results have been expected, after the
hope of constructing an à priori system of knowledge had been
abandoned? I answer: It must be placed by the side of empirical physics
or physics proper; that is, must be regarded as forming a part of
applied philosophy, the à priori principles of which are contained in
pure philosophy, which is therefore connected, although it must not be
confounded, with psychology. Empirical psychology must therefore be
banished from the sphere of metaphysics, and is indeed excluded by the
very idea of that science. In conformity, however, with scholastic
usage, we must permit it to occupy a place in metaphysics—but only as
an appendix to it. We adopt this course from motives of economy; as
psychology is not as yet full enough to occupy our attention as an
independent study, while it is, at the same time, of too great
importance to be entirely excluded or placed where it has still less
affinity than it has with the subject of metaphysics. It is a stranger
who has been long a guest; and we make it welcome to stay, until it can
take up a more suitable abode in a complete system of anthropology—the
pendant to empirical physics.

The above is the general idea of metaphysics, which, as more was
expected from it than could be looked for with justice, and as these
pleasant expectations were unfortunately never realized, fell into
general disrepute. Our Critique must have fully convinced the reader
that, although metaphysics cannot form the foundation of religion, it
must always be one of its most important bulwarks, and that human
reason, which naturally pursues a dialectical course, cannot do without
this science, which checks its tendencies towards dialectic and, by
elevating reason to a scientific and clear self-knowledge, prevents the
ravages which a lawless speculative reason would infallibly commit in
the sphere of morals as well as in that of religion. We may be sure,
therefore, whatever contempt may be thrown upon metaphysics by those
who judge a science not by its own nature, but according to the
accidental effects it may have produced, that it can never be
completely abandoned, that we must always return to it as to a beloved
one who has been for a time estranged, because the questions with which
it is engaged relate to the highest aims of humanity, and reason must
always labour either to attain to settled views in regard to these, or
to destroy those which others have already established.

Metaphysic, therefore—that of nature, as well as that of ethics, but in
an especial manner the criticism which forms the propædeutic to all
the operations of reason—forms properly that department of knowledge
which may be termed, in the truest sense of the word, philosophy. The
path which it pursues is that of science, which, when it has once been
discovered, is never lost, and never misleads. Mathematics, natural
science, the common experience of men, have a high value as means, for
the most part, to accidental ends—but at last also, to those which are
necessary and essential to the existence of humanity. But to guide them
to this high goal, they require the aid of rational cognition on the
basis of pure conceptions, which, be it termed as it may, is properly
nothing but metaphysics.

For the same reason, metaphysics forms likewise the completion of the
culture of human reason. In this respect, it is indispensable, setting
aside altogether the influence which it exerts as a science. For its
subject-matter is the elements and highest maxims of reason, which form
the basis of the possibility of some sciences and of the use of all.
That, as a purely speculative science, it is more useful in preventing
error than in the extension of knowledge, does not detract from its
value; on the contrary, the supreme office of censor which it occupies
assures to it the highest authority and importance. This office it
administers for the purpose of securing order, harmony, and well-being
to science, and of directing its noble and fruitful labours to the
highest possible aim—the happiness of all mankind.

Chapter IV. The History of Pure Reason

This title is placed here merely for the purpose of designating a
division of the system of pure reason of which I do not intend to treat
at present. I shall content myself with casting a cursory glance, from
a purely transcendental point of view—that of the nature of pure
reason—on the labours of philosophers up to the present time. They have
aimed at erecting an edifice of philosophy; but to my eye this edifice
appears to be in a very ruinous condition.

It is very remarkable, although naturally it could not have been
otherwise, that, in the infancy of philosophy, the study of the nature
of God and the constitution of a future world formed the commencement,
rather than the conclusion, as we should have it, of the speculative
efforts of the human mind. However rude the religious conceptions
generated by the remains of the old manners and customs of a less
cultivated time, the intelligent classes were not thereby prevented
from devoting themselves to free inquiry into the existence and nature
of God; and they easily saw that there could be no surer way of
pleasing the invisible ruler of the world, and of attaining to
happiness in another world at least, than a good and honest course of
life in this. Thus theology and morals formed the two chief motives, or
rather the points of attraction in all abstract inquiries. But it was
the former that especially occupied the attention of speculative
reason, and which afterwards became so celebrated under the name of
metaphysics.

I shall not at present indicate the periods of time at which the
greatest changes in metaphysics took place, but shall merely give a
hasty sketch of the different ideas which occasioned the most important
revolutions in this sphere of thought. There are three different ends
in relation to which these revolutions have taken place.

1. In relation to the object of the cognition of reason, philosophers
may be divided into sensualists and intellectualists. Epicurus may be
regarded as the head of the former, Plato of the latter. The
distinction here signalized, subtle as it is, dates from the earliest
times, and was long maintained. The former asserted that reality
resides in sensuous objects alone, and that everything else is merely
imaginary; the latter, that the senses are the parents of illusion and
that truth is to be found in the understanding alone. The former did
not deny to the conceptions of the understanding a certain kind of
reality; but with them it was merely logical, with the others it was
mystical. The former admitted intellectual conceptions, but declared
that sensuous objects alone possessed real existence. The latter
maintained that all real objects were intelligible, and believed that
the pure understanding possessed a faculty of intuition apart from
sense, which, in their opinion, served only to confuse the ideas of the
understanding.

2. In relation to the origin of the pure cognitions of reason, we find
one school maintaining that they are derived entirely from experience,
and another that they have their origin in reason alone. Aristotle
may be regarded as the head of the empiricists, and Plato of the
noologists. Locke, the follower of Aristotle in modern times, and
Leibnitz of Plato (although he cannot be said to have imitated him in
his mysticism), have not been able to bring this question to a settled
conclusion. The procedure of Epicurus in his sensual system, in which
he always restricted his conclusions to the sphere of experience, was
much more consequent than that of Aristotle and Locke. The latter
especially, after having derived all the conceptions and principles
of the mind from experience, goes so far, in the employment of these
conceptions and principles, as to maintain that we can prove the
existence of God and the immortality of the soul—both of them objects
lying beyond the limits of possible experience—with the same force of
demonstration, as any mathematical proposition.

3. In relation to method. Method is procedure according to principles.
We may divide the methods at present employed in the field of inquiry
into the naturalistic and the scientific. The naturalist of pure reason
lays it down as his principle that common reason, without the aid of
science—which he calls sound reason, or common sense—can give a more
satisfactory answer to the most important questions of metaphysics than
speculation is able to do. He must maintain, therefore, that we can
determine the content and circumference of the moon more certainly by
the naked eye, than by the aid of mathematical reasoning. But this
system is mere misology reduced to principles; and, what is the most
absurd thing in this doctrine, the neglect of all scientific means is
paraded as a peculiar method of extending our cognition. As regards
those who are naturalists because they know no better, they are
certainly not to be blamed. They follow common sense, without parading
their ignorance as a method which is to teach us the wonderful secret,
how we are to find the truth which lies at the bottom of the well of
Democritus.

Quod sapio satis est mihi, non ego curo Esse quod
Arcesilas aerumnosique Solones. PERSIUS
—Satirae, iii. 78-79.

is their motto, under which they may lead a pleasant and praiseworthy
life, without troubling themselves with science or troubling science
with them.

As regards those who wish to pursue a scientific method, they have now
the choice of following either the dogmatical or the sceptical, while
they are bound never to desert the systematic mode of procedure. When I
mention, in relation to the former, the celebrated Wolf, and as regards
the latter, David Hume, I may leave, in accordance with my present
intention, all others unnamed. The critical path alone is still open.
If my reader has been kind and patient enough to accompany me on this
hitherto untravelled route, he can now judge whether, if he and others
will contribute their exertions towards making this narrow footpath a
high road of thought, that which many centuries have failed to
accomplish may not be executed before the close of the present—namely,
to bring Reason to perfect contentment in regard to that which has
always, but without permanent results, occupied her powers and engaged
her ardent desire for knowledge.